 THE ECCLESIASTICAL HISTORY ΟF EUSEBIUS Αݲ Τάδε ἡ πρώτη περιέχει βίβλος τῆς Ἐκκληαιαατικῆς ἰατορίας Aݲ Τίς ἡ τῆς ἐπαγγελίας ὑπόθεσις.
 Bݲ Ἐπιτομὴ κεφαλαιώδης περὶ τῆς κατὰ τὸν σωτῆρα καὶ κύριον ἡμῶν τὸν χριστὸν τοῦ θεοῦ προυπάρξεώς τε καὶ θεολογίας.
 Γݲ Ὡς καὶ τὸ Ἰησοῦ ὄνομα καὶ αὐτὸ δὴ τὸ τοῦ Χριατοῦ ἔγνωστό τε ἀνέκαθεν καὶ τετίμητο παρὰ τοῖς θεσπεσίοις προφήταις.
 Δݲ Ὡς οὐ νεώτερος οὐδὲ ξενίζων ἦν ὁ τρόπος τῆς πρὸς αὐτοῦ καταγγελθείσης πᾶαι τοῖς ἔθνεσιν εὐσεβείας.
 Εݲ Περὶ τῶν χρόνων τῆς ἐπιφανείας αὐτοῦ τῆς εἰς ἀνθρώπους.
 ςݲ Ὡς κατὰ τοὺς χρόνους αὐτοῦ ἀκολούθως ταῖς προφητείαις ἐξέλιπον ἄρχοντες οἱ τὸ πρὶν ἐκ προγόνων διαδοχῆς τοῦ Ἰουδαίων ἔθνους ἡγούμενοι πρῶτός τε ἀλλόφυλος βασιλεύει αὐτῶν Ἡρῴδης.
 Ζݲ Περὶ τῆς ἐν τοῖς εὐαγγελίοις νομιζομένης διαφωνίας τῆς περὶ τοῦ Χριστοῦ γενεαλογίας.
 Ηݲ Περὶ τῆς Ἡρῴδου κατὰ τῶν παίδων ἐπι- CONTENTS ΟF BOOKΙ The first book of the Ecclesiastical History contains the following:
 I.
 What are the presuppositionsofthe Promise.
 II.
 Α summary account ofthe pre- existence of, and attributionof divinity to,ourSaviour and Lord, the Christof God.
 III.
 How both the name of Jesus and even that of Christ itself were known from the first and honoured by the inspired prophets.
 ΙV.
 How there was nothing revolutionary or strange in the character of the religion announced by him toallthe nations.
 V.
 Concerning the time of his appearanceto men.
 VI.
 How in his time in agreement with prophecy the previous line of ancestral rulers of the Jewish nation died out, and Herod, the first foreigner, were their king.
 VII.
 Concerning the supposed discrepancy in the Gospels on the genealogy as to Christ.
 VIII.
 Concerning the plot of Herod against the βουλῆς καὶ οἵα μετῆλθεν αὐτὸν καταστροφὴ- βίου.
 Θݲ Περὶ τῶν κατὰ Πιλᾶτον χρόνων.
l Περὶ τῶν παρὰ Ἰουδαίοις ἀρχιερέων καθ’— οὓς ὁ Χριστὸς τὴν διδασκαλίαν ἐποιήσατο.
 ΙΑݲ Τὰ περὶ Ἰωάννου τοῦ βαπτιστοῦ καὶ τοῦ χριστοῦ μεμαρτυρημένα.
 IBݲ Περὶ τῶν μαθητῶν τοῦ σωτῆρος ἡμῶν.
 ΙΓݲ Ἱστορία περὶ τοῦ τῶν Ἐδεσσηνῶν δυνάστου.
 1 children and the catastrophe which overtook him in his Ιife.
 IX.
 Concerning the times of Pilate.
 X.
 Concerning the high priests among the Jews in whose time the Christ gave his teaching.
 XI.
 The evidence relating to John the Baptist and the Christ.
 XII.
 Concerning the disciples of our Saviour.
 XIII.
 Α narrative concerning the ruler of the Edessenes.
 1 ΕΥΣΗΒΙΟΥ ΕΚΚΛΗΣΙΑΣΤΙΚΗΣ ΙΣΤΟΡΙΑΣAΙ.
 τὰς τῶν ἱερῶν ἀποστόλων διαδοχὰς σὺν καὶ τοῖς ἀπὸ τοῦ σωτῆρος ἡμῶν καὶ εἰς ἡμᾶς διηνυσμένοις χρόνοις, ὅαα τε καὶ πηλίκα πραγματευθῆναι κατὰ τὴν ἐκκλησιαστικὴν ἱστορίαν λέγεται, καὶ ὅσοι ταύτης διαπρεπῶς ἐν ταῖς μάλιστα ἐπισημοτάταις παροικίαις ἡγήσαντό τε καὶ προέστησαν, ὅσοι τε κατὰ γενεὰν ἑκάστην ἀγράφως ἢ καὶ διὰ συγγραμμάτων τὸν θεῖον ἐπρέσβευσαν λόγον, τίνες τε καὶ ὅαοι καὶ ὁπηνίκα νεωτεροποιίας ἱμέρῳ πλάνης εἰς ἔσχατον ἐλάσαντες, ψευδωνύμου γνώσεως εἰσηγητὰς ἑαυτοὺς ἀνακεκηρύχασιν, ἀφειδῶς οἷα λύκοι βαρεῖς τὴν χριατοῦ ποίμνην ἐπεντρίβοντες, πρὸς ἐπὶ τούτοις καὶ τὰ παραυτίκα τῆς κατὰ τοῦ σωτῆρος ἡμῶν ἐπιβουλῆς τὸ πᾶν Ἰουδαίων ἔθνος περιελθόντα, ὅσα τε αὖ καὶ ὁποῖα καθ’ οἵους τε χρόνους πρὸς τῶν ἐθνῶν ὁ θεῖος πεπολέμηται λόγος, καὶ πηλίκοι κατὰ καιροὺς τὸν δι’ αἵματος καὶ βασάνων ὑπὲρ αὐτοῦ διεξῆλθον ἀγῶνα, τάτ’ ἐπὶ τούτοις καὶ καθ’ ἡμᾶς THE ECCLESIASTICAL HISTORY OF EUSEBIUS BOOKII.
 I.
 HAVE purposed to record in writing the successions οfthe sacred apostles, covering the period stretching from our Saviour to ourselves;
 the number add character of the transactions recorded in the historyοf the Church;
 the number of those who were distinguished in her governmentandleadership in the provinces οf greatest fame;
 the number of those who in each generation were the ambassadors of the word of God either by speech οr pen;
 the names, the number and the age of those who, driven by the desire of innovation to an extremityof error, have heralded themselves as the introducersof Knowledge, falsely so- called, ravaging the flock of Christ unsparingly, like grim wolves.
 To thisI will addthefate which has beset the whole nation οf the Jewsfrom the momentof their plot against οur saviour;
 moreover, the numberand nature and times οf the wars waged by the heathen against the divine word 1 and the character οf those who,for its sake, passed from time to time through the contest οf blood and torture;
 furthermore the αὐτοὺς μαρτύρια καὶ τὴν ἐπὶ πάσιν ἵλεω καὶ εὐμενῆ τοῦ σωτῆρος ἡμῶν ἀντίληψιν γραφῆ παραδοῦναι προῃρημένος, οὐδ’ ἄλλοθεν ἢ ἀπὸ πρώτηςἄ, ρξομαι τῆς κατὰ τὸν σωτῆρα καὶ κύριον ἡμῶν Ιησοῦν τὸν χριστὸν τοῦ θεοῦ οἰκονομίας.
 ἀλλά μοι συγγνώμην εὐγνωμόνων ἐντεῦθεν ὁ λόγος αἰτεῖ, μείζονα ἢ καθ’ ἡμετέραν δύναμιν ὁμολογῶν εἶναι τὴν ἐπαγγελίαν ἐντελῆ καὶ ἀπαράλειπτον ὑποσχεῖν, ἐπεὶ καὶ πρῶτοι νῦν τῆς ὑποθέσεως ἐπιβάντες οἷά τινα ἐρήμην καὶ ἀτριβῆ ἰέναι ὁδὸν ἐγχειροῦμεν, θεὸν μὲν ὁδηγὸν καὶ τὴν τοῦ κυρίου συνεργὸν σχήσειν εὐχόμενοι δύναμιν, ἀνθρώπων γε μὴν οὐδαμῶς εὑρεῖν οἷοί τε ὄντες ἴχνη γυμνὰ τὴν αὐτὴν ἡμῖν προωδευκότων, μὴ ὅτι σμικρὰς αὐτὸ μόνον προφάσεις, δι’ ὧν ἄλλος ἄλλως ὧν διηνύκασι χρόνων μερικὰς ἡμῖν καταλελοίπασι διηγήσεις, πόρρωθεν ὥσπερ εἰ πυρσοὺς τὰς ἑαυτῶν προανατείνοντες φωνὰς καὶ ἄνωθέν ποθεν ὡς ἐξ ἀπόπτου καὶ ἀπὸ σκοπῆς βοῶντες καὶ διακελευόμενοι, ᾖ χρὴ βαδίζειν καὶ τὴν τοῦ λόγου πορείαν ἀπλανῶς καὶ ἀκινδύνως εὐθύνειν.
 δάα τοίνυν εἰς τὴν προκειμένην ὑπόθεσιν λυσιτελεῖν ἡγούμεθα τῶν αὐτοῖς ἐκείνοις σποράδην μνημονευθέντων, ἀναλεξάμενοι καὶ ὡς ἂν ἐκ λογικῶν λειμώνωντ, ὰς ἐπιτηδείους αὐτῶν τῶν πάλαι συγγραφέων ἀπανθισάμενοι φωνάς, δι’ ὑφηγήσεως ἱστορικῆς πειρασόμεθα σωματοποιῆσαι, ἀγαπῶντες, εἰ καἰ μὴ ἁπάντων, τῶν δ’ οὖν μάλιστα διαφανεστάτων τοῦ σωτῆρος ἡμῶν ἀποστόλων τὰς διαδοχὰς κατὰ τὰς διαπρεπούσας ἔτι καὶ νῦν μνημονευομένας ἐκκλησίας ἀνασωσαίμεθα.
 ἀναγκαιότατα δέ 5 μοι πονεῖσθαι τὴν ὑπόθεσιν ἡγοῦμαι, ὅτι μηδένα martyrdoms of our own time, and the gracious and favouring help of our Saviour in them all.
 Μy starting- point is therefore no other than the first dispensation of God touching our Saviour and Lord, Jesus the Christ.
 Even at that pointthe project at once demands the lenienceofthe kindly, for confessedly it is beyond our power to fulfil the promise, complete and perfect, since we are the first to enter on the undertaking, as travellers on some desolate and untrodden way.
 We pray Godto give ushis guidance, and that we mayhavethe help ofthepower of the Lord, for nowhere canwefind even the barefootstepsof men who havepreceded us inthesame path, unless it be those slight indications by which in divers ways they have left to us partial accounts of the times through which they have passed, raising their voices as a man holds upatorch from afar, calling to us from on high as froma distant watch- tower, and telling us how we must walk, and how to guide the course of our work without error or danger.
 We have therefore collected from their scattered memoirs all that we think will be useful for the present subject, and have brought together the utterances of the ancient writers themselves that are appropriate to it, culling, as it were, the flowers of intellectual fields.
 We shall endeavourto give them unity by historical treatment, rejoicing to rescue the successions, if notof all, at least ofthemost distinguished oftheapostles of our Saviourthroughout those ehurchesof which the fame is still remembered.
 To work at this subjectΙconsider especially necessary, becauseI am not aware πω εἰς δεῦρο τῶν ἐκκλησιαστικῶν συγγραφέων διέγνων περὶ τοῦτο τῆς γραφῆς σπουδὴν πεποιημένον τὸ μέρος·
 ἐλπίζω δ’ ὅτι καὶ ὠφελιμωτάτη τοῖς φιλοτίμως περὶ τὸ χρηστομαθὲς τῆς ἰατορίας ἔχουσιν ἀναφανήσεται.
 ἤδη μὲν οὖν τούτων καὶ πρότερον ἐν οἷς διετυπωσάμην χρονικοῖς κανόσιν ἐπιτομὴν κατεστησάμην, πληρεστάτηνδ’ οὗν ὅμως αὐτῶν ἐπὶ τοῦ παρόντος ὡρμήθην τὴν ἀφήγησιν ποιήσασθαι.
 Καὶ ἄρξεταί γέ μοι ὁ λόγος, ὡς ἔφην, ἀπὸ τῆς κατὰ τὸν χριστὸν ἐπινοουμένης ὑψηλοτέρας καὶ κρείττονος ἢ κατὰ ἄνθρωπον οἰκονομίας τε καὶ θεολογίας.
 καὶ γὰρ τὸν γραφῇ μέλλοντα τῆς ἐκκλησιαστικῆς ὑφηγήσεως παραδώσειν τὴν ἱστορίαν, ἄνωθεν ἐκ πρώτης τῆς κατ’ αὐτὸν τὸν χριστόν, ὅτιπερ ἐξ αὐτοῦ καὶ τῆς προσωνυμίας ἠξιώθημεν, θειοτέρας ἢ κατὰ τὸ δοκοῦν τοῖς πολλοῖς οἰκονομίας ἀναγκαῖον ἂν εἴη κατάρξασθαι.
 ΙΙ.
 Διττοῦ δὲ ὄντος τοῦ κατ’ αὐτὸν τρόπου, καὶ τοῦ μὲν σώματος ἐοικότος κεφαλῇ, ἧ θεὸς ἐπινοεῖται, τοῦ δὲ πόαι παραβαλλομένου, ἧ τὸν ἡμῖν ἄνθρωπον ὁμοιοπαθῆ τῆς ἡμῶν αὐτῶν ἕνεκεν ὑπέδυ σωτηρίας, γένοιτ’ ἂν ἡμῖν ἐντεῦθεν ἐντελὴς ἡ τῶν ἀκολούθων διήγησις, εἰ τῆς κατ’ αὐτὸν ἱστορίας ἁπάσης ἀπὸ τῶν κεφαλαιωδεστάτων κοὶ κυριωτάτων τοῦ λόγου τὴν ὑφήγησιν ποιησαίμεθα·
 ταύτῃ δὲ καὶ τῆς Χριστιανῶν ἀρχαιότητος τὸ παλαιὸν ὁμοῦ καἰ θεοπρεπὲς τοῖς νέαν αὐτὴν καὶ ἐκτετοπισμένην, χθὲς καὶ οὐ πρότερον φανεῖσαν, ἐκτετοπισμένην, ἀναδειχθήσεται.
 that any Christian1 writer has until now paid attention to this kind of writing;
 andI hope thatitshigh value willbe evident to those who are convinced of the importance of a knowledge of the history.
Ι have already summarized the material in the chronological tables whichIhave drawn up,but nevertheless inthe present workI have undertaken to give the narrative in full detail.
Ι will begin with what, apprehended in relation to Christ, is beyondman in itsheightand greatness,— the dispensation of God, and the ascription of divinity.
 2 For he who plans to hand on in writing the history of Christian origins is forced to begin from the first dispensation concerning the Christ himself, which is more divine than it seemsto most, seeing that from him we claim to derive our very name.
 II.
 Now his nature was twofold;
 on the one handlikethe headofthe body,in that heisrecognized as God, on the other comparableto the feet, in that he put on for the sake of our own salvation, man of like passions with us.
 Therefore to make our description of what follows completewe should start the whole narrative concerning himby the most capital and dominant points of the discussion.
 By this means, moreover,the real antiquity and divine character of Christianity will be equally demonstrated to those who suppose that it iS recent and foreign, appearing no earlier than yesterday.
 Γένους μὲν οὗν καὶ ἀξίας αὐτῆς τε οὐσίας τοῦ χριστοῦ καὶ φύσεως οὔτις ἂν εἰς ἔκφρασιν αὐτάρκης γένοιτο λόγος, ἧ καὶ τὸ πνεῦμα τὸ θεῖον ἐν προφητείαις“ τὴν γενεὰν αὐτοῦ’’ φησὶν“ τίς διηγήσεται;
 ὅτι δὴ οὔτε τὸν πατέρα τις ἔγνω, εἰ μὴ ὁ υἱός, οὔτ’ αὖ τὸν υἱόν τις ἔγνω ποτὲ κατ’ ἀξίαν, εἰ μὴ μόνος ὁ γεννήσας αὐτὸν πατήρ, τό τε φῶς τὸ προκόσμιον καὶ τὴν πρὸ αἰώνων νοερὰν καὶ οὐσιώδη σοφίαν τόν τε ζῶντα καὶ ἐν ἀρχῇ παρὰ τῷ πατρὶ τυγχάνοντα θεὸν λόγον τίς ἂν πλὴν τοῦ πατρὸς καθαρῶς ἐννοήσειεν, πρὸ πάσης κτίσεως καὶ δημιουργίας ὁρωμένης τε καὶ ἀοράτου τὸ πρῶτον καὶ μόνον τοῦ θεοῦ γέννημα, τὸν τῆς κατ’ οὐρανὸν λογικῆς καὶ ἀθανάτου στρατιᾶς ἀρχιστράτηγον, τὸν τῆς μεγάλης βουλῆς ἄγγελον, τὸν τῆς ἀρρήτου γνώμης τοῦ πατρὸς ὑπουργόν, τὸν τῶν ἁπάντων σὺν τῷ πατρὶ δημιουργόν, τὸν δεύτερον μετὰ τὸν πατέρα τῶν ὅλων αἴτιον, τὸν τοῦ θεοῦ παῖδα γνήσιον καὶ μονογενῆ, τὸν τῶν γενητῶν ἁπάντων κύριον καὶ θεὸν καὶ βασιλέα τὸ κῦρος ὁμοῦ καὶ τὸ κράτος αὐτὴ θεότητι καὶ δυνάμει καὶ τιμῇ παρὰ τοῦ πατρὸς ὑποδεδεγμένον, ὅτι δὴ κατὰ τὰς περὶ αὐτοῦ μυστικὰς τῶν γραφῶν θεολογίας“ ἐν ἀρχὴ ἦν ὁ λόγος, καὶ ὁ λόγος ἦν πρὸς τὸν θεόν, καὶ θεὸς ἢν ὁ λόγος·
 πάντα δι’ αὐτοῦ ἐγένετο, καὶ χωρὶς αὐτοῦ ἐγένετο οὐδὲ ἕν. ’
’ τοῦτό τοι καὶ ὁ μέγας Μωυσῆς, ὡς ἂν προφητῶν ἁπάντων παλαιότατος, θείῳ πνεύματι τὴν τοῦ παντὸς οὐσίωσίν τε καὶ διακόσμησιν ὑπογράφων, τὸν κοσμοποιὸν καὶ δημιουργὸν τῶν ὅλων αὐτῷ δὴ τῷ Χριστῷ καὶ οὐδὲ ἄλλῳ ἢ τῷ θείῳ δηλαδὴ καὶ Notreatise, indeed, could be sufficient fora statement of the originand dignity,the very bei nature of the Christ:
 as indeed the divine spirit saysin prophecies,“ who will declare his generation?’’ seeing that neither does any know the Father save the son, neither did any ever knowthe son properly, save οnly the Father who begat him.
 nd who exceptthe Father would ever clearly conceive the ante- mundane light, and that wisdom which was intellectual and real1before the ages, the livingLogos who was,in the beginning, God bythe sideof the Father, the firstand onlyoffspring οf God,before all creation and fabrication,2 both visible and invisible, the captainofthe spiritual and immortalhostof heaven, the angelof great counsel,the minister οf the ineffable plan of the Father, the fabricator οf all things along withthe Father, the true and only begotten child of God, the Lord and God and King of all begotten, Who has received lordship and might together with deity itself, and power and honour from the Father, according to the mysterious ascription of divinity to him in the Scriptures,“ In the beginningwasthe Logos and the Logos was with God and the Logos was God, all thingswere through him, and withouthim was no single thing’’? This, indeed, is also the teaching ofthe great Moses,as the most ancientof all prophets, when by divine inspiration he described the coming into being, and the ordering of the universe, that the creator and fabricator of all things gave up to the Chirst himself, and to no other than his πρωτογόνῳ ἑαυτοῦ λόγῳ τὴν τῶν ὑποβεβηκότων ποίησιν παραχωροῦντα διδάσκει αὐτῷ τε κοινολογούμενον ἐπὶ τῆς ἀνθρωπογονίας·
“ εἶπεν γὰρ φησὶν“ ὁ θεός·
 ποιήσωμεν ἄνθρωπον κατ’ εἰκόνα ἡμετέραν καὶ καθ’ ὁμοίωσιν.
 ᾿’ ’ ταύτην δὲ ἐγγυᾶται τὴν φωνὴν προφητῶν ἄλλος, ὧδέ πως ἐν ὕμνοις θεολογῶν“ αὐτὸς εἶπεν, καὶ ἐγενήθησαν·
 αὐτὸς ἐνετείλατο, καὶ ἐκτίσθησαν,” τὸν μὲν πατέρα καὶ ποιητὴν εἰσάγων ὡς ἂν πανηγεμόνα βασιλικῷ νεύματι προστάττοντα, τὸν δὲ τούτῳ δευτερεύοντα θεῖον λόγον, οὐχ ἕτερον τοῦ πρὸς ἡμῶν κηρυττομένου, ταῖς πατρικαῖς ἐπιτάξεσιν ὑπουργοῦντα.
 τοῦτον καὶ ἀπὸ πρώτης ἀνθρωπογονίας πάντες ὅαοι δὴ δικαιοσύνη καὶ θεοσεβείας ἀρετῇ διαπρέψαι λέγονται, ἀμφί τε τὸν μέγαν θεράποντα Μωυσέα καὶ πρό γε αὐτοῦ πρῶτος Ἀβραὰμ τούτου τε οἱ παῖδες καὶ ὅσοι μετέπειτα δίκαιοι πεφήνασιν καὶ προφῆται, καθαροῖς διανοίας ὄμμασι φαντασθέντες ἔγνωσάν τε καὶ οἷα θεοῦ παιδὶ τό προσῆκον ἀπένειμαν σέβας, αὐτός τε, οὐδαμῶς ἀπορρᾳθυμῶν τῆς τοῦ πατρὸς καθίστατο διδάσκαλος τοῖς πᾶσι τῆς πατρικῆς καθίστατο γνώσεως.
 ὦφθαι γοῦν κύριος ὁ θεὸς ἀνείρηται οἷά τις ἄνθρωπος τῷ Ἀβραὰμ καθημένῳ παρὰ τὴν δρῦν τὴν Μαμβρῆ·
 ὁ δ’ ὑποπεσὼν αὐτίκα, καίτοι γε ἄνθρωπον ὀφθαλμοῖς ὁρῶν, προσκυνεῖ μὲν ὡς θεόν, ἱκετεύει δὲ ὡς κύριον, ὁμολογεῖ τε μὴ ἀγνοεῖν ὅστις εἴη, ῥήμασιν αὐτοῖς λέγων“ κύριε divine and first- born Logos, the making οf subordinate thinks and communed with him concerning the creation of man.
“ For,” he says, “ God let us make man in our own image and likeness.
” Αnοther ofthe prophets confirms this saying, ascribing divinity to him in one place in hymns,“ Ηe spake andtheywere begotten,he commanded and they were”1 On theonehand he intro- duces the Father and Maker asa universal sovereign, commanding by his royal nod, and on the other the divine Logos — no other than him who is proclaimed by us — as secondary to him, and ministering to his Father's commands.
 Him even from creation of mankind did all who are said to have heen pre- eminent in righteousness and virtuous piety recognize by the contemplation of the pure eyes of the mind, and pay him the reverence due to a child of God;
 thus did Moses, the great servant, and his fellows, and even before him Abraham, the first, and his children, and all the righteous and prophets who have since appeared;
 and he himself, never wearying of piety toward the Father, has beena teacher toall men of knowledgeofthe Father.
 Thus the Lord God is said to have appeared as an ordinary man to Abraham, while he was seated by the oak of Mamre.
 But he fell down immediately, even though he saw him as a man with his eyes, worshipped himas God, besought him as Lord, and confessed that he was not ignorantwho he was sayinginhis own words, ὁ κρίνων πᾶσαν τὴν γῆν, οὐ ποιήσεις κρίσιν;’
’ εἰ γὰρ μηδεὶς ἐπιτρέποι λόγος τὴν ἀγένητον καὶ ἄτρεπτον οὐσίαν θεοῦ τοῦ παντοκράτορος εἰς ἀνδρὸς εἶδος μεταβάλλειν μηδ’ αὗ γενητοῦ μηθενὸς φαντασίᾳ τὰς τῶν ὁρώντων ὄφεις ἐξαπατᾶν μηδὲ μὴν ψευδῶς τὰ τοιαῦτα πλάττεσθαι τὴν γραφήν, θεὸς καὶ κύριος ὁ κρίνων πᾶσαν τὴν γῆν καὶ ποιῶν κρίσιν, ἐν ἀνθρώπου ὁρώμενος σχήματι, τίς ἂν ἕτερος ἀναγορεύοιτο, εἰ μὴ φάναι θέμις τὸ πρῶτον τῶν ὅλων αἴτιον, ἢ μόνος ὁ’π’ ῥοῶν αὐτοῦ λόγος;
 περὶ οὗ καὶ ἐν ψαλμοῖς ἀνείρηται“ ἀπέστειλεν τὸν λόγον αὐτοῦ, καὶ ἰάσατο αὐτούς, καὶ ἐρρύσατο αὐτοὺς ἐκ τῶν διαφθορῶν αὐτῶν.’
’ τοῦτον δεύτερον μετὰ τὸν πατέρα κύριον σαφέστατα Μωυσῆς ἀναγορεύει λέγων“ ἔβρεξε κύριος ἐπὶ Σόδομα καὶ Γόμορρα θεῖον καὶ πῦρ παρὰ κυρίου.
 ” τοῦτον καὶ τῷ Ἰακὼβ αὖθις ἐν ἀνδρὸς φανέντα σχήματι, θεὸν ἡ θεία προααγορεύει γραφή, φάσκοντα τῷ Ἰακὼβ “ οὐκέτι κληθήσεται τὸ ὄνομά ἀοῦ Ἰακώβ, ἀλλ’ Ἰσραὴλ ἔσται τὸ ὄνομά ἀοῦ, ὅτι ἐνίσχυσας μετὰ θεοῦ,’’ ὅτε καὶ“ ἐκάλεσεν Ἰακὼβ τὸ ὄνομα τοῦ τόπου ἐκείνου Εἶδος θεοῦ,’’ λέγων“ εἶδον γὰρ θεὸν πρόσωπον πρὸς πρόσωπον, καὶ ἐσώθη μου ἡ ψυχή.
” καὶ μὴν οὐδ’ ὑποβεβηκότων ἀγγέλων καὶ λειτουργῶν θεοῦ τὰς ἀναγραφείσας θεοφανείας ὑπονοεῖν θέμις, ἐπειδὴ καὶ τούτων ὅτε τις ἀνθρώποις παραφαίνεται, οὐκ ἐπικρύπτεται ἡ γραφή, ὀνομαστὶ οὐ θεὸν οὐδὲ μὴν κύριον, ἀλλ’ ἀγγέλους χρηματίσαι λέγουσα, ὡς διὰ μυρίων μαρτυριῶν πιστώσασθαι ῥᾴδιον.
 τοῦτον καὶ ὁ Μωυσέως διάδοχος Ἰησοῦς,“O Lord, that judgestall the earth, wilt thou not do judgement?’’ For inasmuchas no reasonwouldallow that the uncreatedand unchangeable substance οf the Almighty was converted into the form of man, or deceived the eyes of the beholders by the phantasm of anything created, or that the Scripture has falsely invented such a story, who other could be described as God, and as the Lord who judges all the earth and does judgement, appearing in the form of man( seeing thatit is impropertocall him the firstcause of the universe), than his pre- existent Logos alone?Αnd concering him it was said inthe Psalms,“ Ηe sent forth his Logos and healed them, and he rescued them from their corruptions.
” Of him, too, Μoses clearly asa second Lord, after the Father, when he says,“ The Lord rained on Sodom and Gomorrah brimstone and fire from the Lord.
” Him the divineScripture also calls God when he appears in human form to Jacob, saying to Jacob,“ Thy name shall no morebe called Jacob, but Israelshallbe thy name because thou hadst power with God.
 ” Then, too,“ Jacob called the name οf the place‘ the Vision of God,’ saying,‘ ForIsaw God facetoface my lifewas saved. ’
’’ 1 Αndit cannot be right suppose that the Theophanies described were the appearances of subordinate angels and ministers of God, for whenever οne οf these appearsto men the scripture does not conceal it, but says definitely that they are called angels, not Godor Lord, as it is easytoprove from countless passages.
 Ηim, too, Joshua,the successorof Moses, calls the chief captain οf the host of the Lord, as if he were the ὡς ἂν τῶν οὐρανίων ἀγγέλων καὶ ἀρχαγγέλων τῶν τε ὑπερκοσμίων δυνάμεων ἡγούμενον καὶ ὡς ἂν εἰ τοῦ πατρὸς ὑπάρχοντα δύναμιν καὶ σοφίαν καὶ τὰ δευτερεῖα τῆς κατὰ πάντων βασιλείας τε καὶ ἀρχῆς ἐμπεπιστευμένον, ἀρχιστράτηγον δυνάμεως κυρίου ὀνομάζει, οὐκ ἄλλως αὐτὸν ἢ αὗθις ἐν ἀνθρώπου μορφῇ καὶ σχήματι θεωρήσας.
 γέ- γραπταὶ γοῦν“ καὶ ἐγενήθη, ὡς ἦν Ἰησοῦς Ἱεριχώ, καὶ ἀναβλέψας ὁρᾷ ἄνθρωπον ἑστηκότα κατέναντι αὐτοῦ, καὶ ἡ ῥομφαία ἐσπασμένη ἐν τῆ χειρὶ αὐτοῦ, καὶ προσελθὼν Ἰησοῦς εἶπεν,ἴ’ ἡμέτερος εἶ ἢ τῶν ὑπεναντίων;’
 καὶ εἶπεν αὐτῷ, ἐγὼ ἀρχιστράτηγος δυνάμεως κυρίου·
 νυνὶ παραγέγονα.’
 καὶ Ἰησοῦς ἔπεσεν ἐπὶ πρόσωπον ἐπὶ τὴν γῆν καὶ εἶπεν αὐτῷ,ἴ’ δέσποτα, τί προστάσσεις τῷ ἀῶ οἰκέτῃ;’
 καὶ εἶπεν ὁ ἀρχιστράτηγος κυρίου πρὸς Ἰησοῦν,ἴ’ λῦσαι τὸ ὑπόδημα ἐκ τῶν ποδῶν σου·
 ὁ γὰρ τόπος, ἐν ᾧ αὖ ἕστηκας, τόπος ἅγιός ἐστιν. ’
’’ ἔνθα καὶ ἐπιστήσεις ἀπὸ τῶν αὐτῶν ῥημάτων ὅτι μὴ ἕτερος οὗτος εἴη τοῦ καὶ Μωυσεῖ κεχρηματικότος, ὅτι δὴ αὐτοῖς ῥήμασι καὶ ἐπὶ τῷδέ φησιν ἡ γραφή “ ὡς δὲ εἶδεν κύριος προσάγει ἰδεῖν, ἐκάλεσεν αὐτὸν κύριος ἐκ τοῦ βάτου λέγων,‘ Μωυσῆ Μωυσῆ’·
 ὁ δὲ εἶπεν, τί ἐστιν;’
 καὶ εμεν, μὴ ἐγγίσῃς ὧδε·
 λῦσαι τὸ ὑπόδημα ἐκ τῶν ποδῶν σου·
 ὁ γὰρ τόπος, ἐν ᾧ σὺ ἕστηκας ἐπ’ αὐτοῦ, γῆ ἁγία ἐστίν. ’
 καἰ εἶπεν αὐτῷ, ἐγώ εἰμι ὁ θεὸς τοῦ πατρός ἀοῦ, θεὸς Ἀβραὰμ καὶ θεὸς Ἰσαὰκ καὶ θεὸς Ἰακώβ.’
 ’’ καὶ ὅτι γέ ἐστιν οὐσία τις προκόσμιος ζῶσα καὶ ὑφεστῶσα, ἡ τῷ πατρὶ καὶ θεῷ τῶν ὅλων εἰς τὴν τῶν γενητῶν ἁπάντων δημιουργίαν ὑπηρετησαμένη, leader of the heavenlyangelsand archangels, and the supernal powers, and as if he were of the power and wisdom of the Father, entrusted with the second rank in his universal kingdom and rule, though Joshua, too, saw him in none but human form and shape.
 Ιt is written at least,“ And it eame to pass, while Joshua was in Jericho that he looked up and sawaman standing over against him, and his sword was drawninhis hand, and Joshua went to him and said, Αrt thoufor us orforour adversaries?Αnd he saidtohim, As chief captainof the host of the Lord amΙnow come.
 Αnd Joshua fell on his faceonthe earth, and said tohim, Lord, what dost thou command thy servant? And the chief captain of the Lordsaid to Joshua, Loose thy shoe from off thy feet, for the place whereon thou standest is a holy place.
 ” Here, too, you will perceive from the words themselves that thisis none other than he who spokealso to Moses, for ofhimalso the Scripture usesthe same words,“ And whentheLord saw that he drewnightto see, the Lord called him out ofthe bush saying, Moses, Moses.
 And said, What isit?And he said, Do not draw near here.
 Loose thy shoe from off thy feet, for the place whereon thou standest is holy ground.
 And he said to him,I am the Godofthy Father, the God of Abraham, and Godof Isaac andGodof Jacob.
” And that there reallya certain being living and existent before the world, who ministered to the Father and God of the universe for the fabrication of all created things, called λόγος θεοῦ καὶ σοφία χρηματίζουσα, πρὸς ταῖς τεθειμέναις ἀποδείξεσιν ἔτι καὶ αὐτῆς ἐξ ἰδίου προσώπου τῆς σοφίας ἐπακοῦσαι πάρεστιν, διὰ Σολομῶνος λευκότατα ὧδέ πως τὰ περὶ αὐτῆς μυσταγωγούσης“ ἐγὼ ἢ σοφία κατεσκήνωσα βουλήν, καὶ γνῶσιν καὶ ἔννοιαν ἐγὼ ἐπεκαλεσάμην.
 δι’ ἐμοῦ βασιλεῖς βασιλεύουσιν, καὶ οἱ δυνάσται γράφουσι δικαιοσύνην·
 δι’ ἐμοῦ μεγιστᾶνες μεγαλύνονται, καὶ τύραννοι δι’ ἐμοῦ κρατοῦσι γῆς·
 οἷς ἐπιλέγει“ κύριος ἔκτισέν με ἀρχὴν ὁδῶν αὖ·
 τοῦ εἰς ἔργα αὐτοῦ, πρὸ τοῦ αἰῶνος ἐθεμελίωσέν με·
 ὲν ἀρχὴ πρὸ του τὴν γῆν ποιησαι, πρὸ του προελθεῖν τὰς πηγὰς τῶν ὑδάτων, πρὸ τοῦ ὄρη ἑδρασθῆναι, πρὸ δὲ πάντων βουνῶν γεννᾷ με.
 ἡνίκα ἡτοίμαζεν τὸν οὐρανόν, συμπαρήμην αὐτῷ, καὶ ὡς ἀσφαλεῖς ἐτίθει πηγὰς τῆς ὑπ’ οὐρανόν, ἤ μὴν σὺν αὐτῷ ἁρμόζουσα.
 ἐγὼ ἤ μὴν ἧ προσέχαιρεν καθ’ ἡμέραν, εὐφραινόμην δὲ ἐνώπιον αὐτοῦ ἐν παντὶ καιρῷ, ὅτε εὐφραίνετο τὴν οἰκουμένην συντελέσας.
 ” ὅτι μὲν οὖν προῆν καὶ τισὶν,1 εἰ καὶ μὴ τοῖς πᾶσιν, ὁ θεῖος λόγος ἐπεφαίνετο, ταῦθ’ ἡμῖν ὡς ἐν βραχέσιν εἰρήσθω.
 Τί δὴ οὖν οὐχὶ καθάπερ τὰ νῦν, καὶ πάλαι πρότερον εἰς πάντας ἀνθρώπους καὶ πᾶσιν ἔθνεσιν ἐκηρύττετο, ὧδε ἂν γένοιτο πρόδηλον.
 οὐκ ἢν πω χωρεῖν οἷός τε τὴν τοῦ Χριστοῦ πάνσοφον καὶ πανάρετον διδασκαλίαν ὁ πάλαι τῶν ἀνθρώπων βίος.
 εὐθὺς μέν γε ἐν ἀρχῇ μετὰ τὴν πρώτην ἐν μακαρίοις ζωὴν ὁ πρῶτος ἄνθρωπος ἦττον τῆς θείας ἐντολῆς φροντίσας, εἰς τουτονὶ τὸν θνητὸν καὶ ἐπίκηρον βίον καταπέπτωκεν καὶ τὴν ἐπάρατον ταυτηνὶ γῆν τῆς πάλαι ἐνθέου τρυφῆς ἀντικατηλλά- the Logos and Wisdom of God, can be learned from he actual personof Wisdom herself, in addition tothe preceding proofs, for in one place she tells her own secret very clearly through Solomon,“Ι, Wisdom, made Counsel my habitation andI invoked Knowledge and Thought;
 through me kings reign, and the mighty inscribe justice;
 by me greatmenare magnified, and sovereigns rule the earth through me.
” Αnd tothisshe adds,‘‘ The Lord createdasthe beginning of his ways for his works;
 he established me before the world;
 in the beginning, before the making of the earth, before the springs οf water came forth, before the mountains were founded, and before all hills, he begat me.
 When he prepared the heaven,I was present with him, and whenhe made safethe springs whichare under heaven,I was with him giving them order.
I was sheinwhom he rejoiced dailyandI exulted before himat all times, when he exulted that he bad completed the world.
” Thus let this be short proof that the divine Logos pre- existed,and appearedto some,if not to all, men.
 It must nowbe demonstrated why this announcement was not formerly made, long ago, to all menand all nations, as it is now.
 The life of men in the past was not capable οf receiving the complete wisdom and virtue of the teachingof Christ.
 For at the beginning, after the first life in blessedness,the first man, despising the command of God, fell at once to this mortal and perishable life, and exchanged the former divine delights for this earth ξατο, οἱ τε ἀπὸ τούτου τὴν καθ’ ἡμᾶς σύμπασαν πληρώσαντες πολὺ χείρους ἀναφανέντες ἐκτὸς ἑνός που καὶ δευτέρου, θηριώδη τινὰ τρόπον καὶ βίον ἀβίωτον ἐπανῄρηντο·
 ἀλλὰ καὶ οὔτε πόλιν οὔτε πολιτείαν, οὐ τέχνας, οὐκ ἐπιστήμας ἐπὶ νοῦν ἐβάλλοντο, νόμων τε καὶ δικαιωμάτων καὶ προσέτι ἀρετῆς καὶ φιλοσοφίας οὐδὲ ὀνόματος μετεῖχον, νομάδες δὲ ἐπ’ ἐρημίας οἷά τινες ἄγριοι καὶ ἀπηνεῖς διῆγον, τοὺς μὲν ἐκ φύσεως προσήκοντας λογισμοὺς τά τε λογικὰ καὶ ἥμερα τῆς ἀνθρώπων ψυχῆς σπέρματα αὐτοπροαιρέτου κακίας ὑπερβολῇ διαφθείροντες, ἀνοσιουργίαις δὲ πάσαις ὅλους ἁφᾶς ἐκδεδωκότες, ὡς τοτὲ μὲν ἀλληλοφθορεῖν, τοτὲ δὲ ἀλληλοκτονεῖν, ἄλλοτε δὲ ἀνθ’ ἀνθρωποβορεῖν, θεομαχίας τε καὶ τὰς παρὰ τοῖς πᾶσιν βοωμένας γιγαντομαχίας ἐπιτολμᾶν, καὶ γῆν μὲν ἐπιτειχίζειν οὐρανῷ διανοεῖσθαι, μανίᾳ δὲ φρονήματος ἐκτόπου αὐτὸν τὸν ἐπὶ πᾶσιν πολεμεῖν παρασκευάζεσθαι·
 ἐφ’ οἷς τοῦτον ἑαυτοῖς εἰσάγουσι τὸν τρόπον κατακλυσμοῖς αὐτοὺς καὶ πυρποΛήσεσιν ὥσπερ ἀγρίαν ὕλην κατὰ πάσης τῆς γῆς κεχυμένην θεὸς ὁ πάντων ἔφορος μετῄει, λιμοῖς τε συνεχέσι καὶ λοιμοῖς πολέμοις τε αὗ καὶ κεραυνῶν βολαῖς ἄνωθεν αὐτοὺς ὑπετέμνετο, ὥσπερ τινὰ δεινὴν καὶ χαλεπωτάτην νόσον ψυχῶν πικροτέροις ἀνέχων τοῖς κοΛαστηρίοις.
 τότε μὲν οὖν, ὅτε δὴ καὶ πολὺς ἦν ἐπικεχυμένος ὀλίγου δεῖν κατὰ πάντων ὁ τῆς κακίας κάρος, οἷα μέθης δεινῆς, τὰς ἁπάντων σχεδὸν ἀνθρώπων ἐπισκιαζούσης καὶ ἐπιακο- τούσης ψυχάς, ἡ πρωτόγονος καὶ πρωτόκτιστος του θεοῦ σοφία καὶ αὐτὸς ὁ προὼν λόγος φιλανθρωπίας ὑπερβολῇ τοτὲ μὲν δι’ ὀπτασίας ἀγγέλων with its curse;
 and after him those who filled all our world were manifestly much worse, withy the exception of one or two, and chose some brutal habit of life, unworthy of the name.
 They gave no thought tocityor state, to art or knowledge, they had not even the name of laws and decrees orvirtue and philosophy, but they lived as nomads in the wildernesses like savage and unbridled being;
 they destroyed by their excess of self- chosen wickednessthe natural reasonings, and the germs οf thought and gentleness in the human soul;
 they gave themselves up completelyto all iniquity so that at one time they corruptedone another, at another they murdered οne another, at another they were cannibals;
 they ventured on conflicts with God and on the battles οf the giants famous among all men;
 they thought to wall up the earthto heaven, and in the madness ofa perverted mind prepared for war against the supreme God himself.
 while they were leading this life, God,the guardian of all, pursued them with floods and conflagrations, as though they had beena wild forest scattered throughout the whole earth;
 he cut themoff with perpetualfamines and plagues, by wars and by thunderboltsfrom οn high, as if he were restraining by bitter chastisement some terrible and grievous disease of their souls.
 Then, indeed, when the great flood οf evil had come nigh overwhelming all men, like a terrible intoxication overshadowing and darkening the souls οf almost all, the first- begotten and firstcreated Wisdom of God, the pre- existent Logos himself, in his exceeding kindness appeared to his subjects, at one time by a vision οf angels, at another τοῖς ὑποβεβηκόσι, τοτὲ δὲ καὶ δι’ ἑαυτοῦ οἷα θεοῦ δύναμις σωτήριος ἑνί που νὴ δευτέρῳ τῶν πάλαι θεοφιλῶν ἀνδρῶν οὐκ ἄλλως ἢ δι’ ἀνθρώπου μορφῆς, ὅτι μηδ’ ἑτέρως ἢν δυνατὸν αὐτοῖς, ὑπεφαίνετο.
 ‘ Ως δ’ ἤδη διὰ τούτων τὰ θεοσεβείας σπέρματα εἰς πλῆθος ἀνδρῶν καταβέβλητο ὅλον τε ἔθνος ἐπὶ γῆς θεοσεβείᾳ προσανέχον ἐκ τῶν ἀνέκαθεν Ἑβραίων ὑπέστη, τούτοις μέν, ὡς ἄν εἰ πλήθεσιν ἔτι ταῖς παλαιαῖς ἀγωγαῖς ἐκδεδιῃτημένοις, διὰ τοῦ προφήτου Μωυσέως εἰκόνας καὶ σύμβολα σαββάτου τινὸς μυστικοῦ καὶ περιτομῆς ἑτέρων τε νοητῶν θεωρημάτων εἰσαγωγάς, ἀλλ’ οὐκ αὐτὰς ἐναργεῖς παρεδίδου μυσταγωγίας·
 ὡς δὲ τῆς παρὰ τούτοις νομοθεσίας βοωμένης καὶ πνοῆς δίκην εὐώδους εἰς ἅπαντας ἀνθρώπους διαδιδομένης, ἤδη τότε ἐξ αὐτῶν καὶ τοῖς πλείοσιν τῶν ἐθνῶν διὰ τῶν πανταχόσε νομοθετῶν τε καὶ φιλοσόφων ἡμέρωτο τὰ φρονήματα, τῆς ἀγρίας καὶ ἀπηνοῦς θηριωδίας ἐπὶ τὸ πρᾶον μεταβεβλημένης, ὡς καὶ εἰρήνην βαθεῖαν φιλίας τε καὶ ἐπιμιξίας πρὸς ἀλλήλους ἔχειν, τηνικαῦτα πᾶσι δὴ λοιπὸν ἀνθρώποις καὶ τοῖς ἀνὰ τὴν οἰκουμένην ἔθνεσιν ὡς ἂν προωφελημένοις.
 καὶ ἤδη τυγχάνουσιν ἐπιτηδείοις πρὸς παραδοχὴν τῆς τοῦ πατρὸς γνώσεως, ὁ αὐτὸς δὴ πάλιν ἐκεῖνος ὁ τῶν ἀρετῶν διδάσκαλος, ὁ ἐν πᾶσιν ἀγαθοῖς τοῦ πατρὸς ὑπουργός, ὁ θεῖος καὶ οὐράνιος τοῦ θεοῦ λόγος, δι’ ἀνθρώπου κατὰ μηδὲν σώματος οὐσίᾳ τὴν ἡμετέραν φύσιν διαλλάττοντος ἀρχομένης τῆς‘ Ρωμαίων βασιλείας ἐπιφανείς, τοιαῦτα ἔδρασέν τε καὶ πέπονθεν, οἷα ταῖς προφητείαις ἀκόλουθα ἢν, ἄνθρωπον ὁμοῦ καὶ θεὸν ἐπιδημήσειν τῷ βίῳ personally to one or two of the God- fearing menof old, as a saving power οf God, yet in no otherformthan human, for they could not receivehim otherwise.
 But when the seeds of true religionhad been strewn by them amongamultitude of men,anda whole nation, sprung from the Hebrews, existed on earth, cleaving to true religion, he handedonto them, through the prophet Moses, images and symbols οfa certain mysterious sabbath and of circum.
 cision and instruction in οther spiritual principles, but not unveiled initiation itself, for many of them had still been brought up in the old practices.
 Their Law became famous and spread among all men like a fragrant breeze.
 Beginning with them the minds of most οf the heathen were softened by the law givers and philosophers who arose everywhere.
 Savage and unbridled brutality was changed to mild, ness, so that deeppeace, friendship, and mutual intercourse obtained.
 Then, at last,when all men, even the heathen throughout the world, were now fitted for the benefits perparedfor them beforehand, for the reception of knowledge of the Father, then again that same divine and heavenly Logos of God, the teacher of virtues, the minister of the Father in all good things, appeared at the beginning οf the Roman Εmpire through man.
 In nothing didhe change our nature as touching bodily substance;
 his acts and sufferings were such as were consistent with the prophecies which foretell that man and God shall live together to do marvellous παραδόξων ἔργων ποιητὴν καὶ τοῖς πᾶσιν ἔθνεσιν διδάσκαλον τῆς τοῦ πατρὸς εὐσεβείας ἀναδειχθήσεσθαι τό τε παράδοξον αὐτοῦ τῆς γενέσεως καὶ τὴν καινὴν διδασκαλίαν καὶ τῶν ἔργων τὰ θαύματα ἐπί τε τούτοις τοῦ θανάτου τὸν τρόπον τήν τε ἐκ νεκρῶν ἀνάστασιν καὶ ἐπὶ πᾶσιν τὴν εἰς οὐρανοὺς ἔνθεον ἀποκατάστασιν αὐτοῦ προκηρυττούσαις.
 τὴν γοῦν ἐπὶ τέλει βασιλείαν αὐτοῦ Δανιὴλ ὁ προφήτης θείῳ πνεύματι συνορῶν, ὧδέ πη ἐθεοφορεῖτο, ἀνθρωπινώτερον τὴν θεοπτίαν ὑπογράφων·
“ ἐθεώρουν γάρ’ φησίν“ ἕως οὗ θρόνοι ἐτέθησαν, καὶ παλαιὸς ἡμερῶν ἐκάθητο.
 καὶ τὸ ἔνδυμα αὐτοῦ ὡς εἰ χιὼν λευκόν, καὶ ἡ θρὶξ τῆς κεφαλῆς αὐτοῦ ὡς εἰ ἔριον καθαρόν·
 ὁ θρόνος αὐτοῦ φλὸξ πυρός, οἱ τροχοὶ αὐτοῦ πῦρ φλέγον·
 ποταμὸς πυρὸς εἷλκεν ἔμπροσθεν αὐτοῦ.
 χίλιαι χιλιάδες ἐλειτούργουν αὐτῷ, καὶ μύριαι μυριάδες παρειστήκεισαν ἔμπροσθεν αὐτοῦ.
 κριτήριον ἐκάθισεν, καὶ βίβλοι ἠνεῴχθησαν.
” καὶ ἑξῆς“ ἐθεώρουν,” φησίν“ καὶ ἰδοὺ μετὰ τῶν νεφελῶν τοῦ οὐρανοῦ ὡς εἰ υἱὸς ἀνθρώπου ἐρχόμενος, καὶ ἕως τοῦ παλαιοῦ τῶν ἡμερῶν ἔφθασεν, καὶ ἐνώπιον αὐτοῦ προσηνέχθη·
 καὶ αὐτῷ ἐδόθη ἡ ἀρχὴ καὶ ἡ τιμὴ καὶ ἡ βασιλεία, καὶ πάντες οἱ λαοὶ φυλαὶ γλῶσσαι αὐτῷ δουλεύσουσιν.
 ἢ ἐξουσία αὐτοῦ ἐξουσία αἰώνιος, ἥτις οὐ παρελεύσεται·
 καὶ ἡ βασιλεία αὐτοῦ οὐ διαφθαρήσεται.
 ” ταῦτα δὲ σαφῶς οὐδ’ ἐφ’ ἕτερον, ἀλλ’ ἐπὶ τὸν ἡμέτερον σωτῆρα, τὸν ἐν ἀρχῇ πρὸς τὸν θεὸν θεὸν λόγον, ἀναφέροιτο ἄν, υἱὸν ἀνθρώπου διὰ τὴν ὑστάτην ἐνανθρώπησιν αὐτοῦ χρηματίζοντα.
 ἀλλὰ γὰρ ἐν οἰκείοις ὑπομνήμασιν τὰς περὶ τοῦ σωτῆρος deeds, and to teach to all Gentiles the worshipofthe Father,and that the marvelofhis birth and his new teaching and the wonder of his deeds will be made manifest together with the manner of his death and resurrection fromthe dead, and, above all, his divine restoration to Heaven.
 Daniel the prophet, in amoment of inspiration, saw by the divine spirit his final sovereignty, and describesthe vision ofGodin human wise:
 “ ForI beheld,” said,“ until thrones were set and an Ancient of Days did sit.
 Αnd his garment was white like snow and the hair of his head was like pure wool;
 his throne wasa flame of fire, his wheels were flaming fire,a river of fireranbefore him, thousand thousands ministered unto him and ten thousand times ten thousand stood before him, the judgement sat, and books were” Αnd he goeson to say,“I beheld, and lo, one like toa son ofmancomingwiththe cloudsof Heaven,and he came to the Ancient of Days and was brought before him.
 Αnd to him was given the sovereignty andhonourand kingdom, and all the people, tribes,and tongues shall serve him.
 His power is an everlasting power, which shallnot pass away, and his kingdom shall notbe destroyed.
” Clearly this would apply none but our Saviour, the God- Logos who was in the beginning with God, called “ son of man’’ because ofhis ultimate incarnation.
 However, since we have collected in special treatises the ἡμῶν Ἰησοῦ χριατοῦ προφητικὰς ἐκλογὰς συναγαγόντες ἀποδεικτικώτερόν τε τὰ περὶ αὐτοῦ δηλούμενα ἐν ἑτέροις συστήσαντες, τοῖς εἰρημένοις ἐπὶ τοῦ παρόντος ἀρκεσθησόμεθα.
 ΙΙΙ.
 Ὅτι δὲ καὶ αὐτὸ τοὔνομα τοῦ τε Ἰησοῦ καὶ δὴ καὶ τοῦ Χριστοῦ παρ’ αὐτοῖς τοῖς πάλαι θεοφιλέσιν προφήταις τετίμητο, ἤδη καιρὸς ἀποδεικνύναι.
 σεπτὸν ὡς ἔνι μάλιστα καὶ ἔνδοξον τὸ Χριστοῦ ὄνομα πρῶτος αὐτὸς γνωρίσας Μωυσῆς τύπους οὐρανίων καὶ σύμβολα μυστηριώδεις τε εἰκόνας ἀκολούθως χρησμῷ φήσαντι αὐτῷ“ ὅρα, ποιήσεις πάντα κάτα’ τον τύπον’ τον δειχθέντα σοι ὲν τῳ ὄρει” παραδούς, ἀρχιερέα θεοῦ, ὡς ἐνῆν μάλιστα δυνατὸν ἄνθρωπον, ἐπιφημίσας, τοῦτον Χριστὸν ἀναγορεύει, καὶ ταύτῃ γε τῇ κάτα τὴν αρχιερωσύνην ἀξίᾳ, πᾶσαν ὑπερβαλλούσῃ παρ’ αὐτῷ τὴν ἐν ἀνθρώποις προεδρίαν, ἐπὶ τιμῇ καὶ δόξη τὸ τοῦ χριστοῦ περιτίθησιν ὄνομα·
 οὕτως ἄρα τὸν Χριστὸν θεῖόν τι χρῆμα ἠπίστατο.
 ὁ δ’ αὐτό καὶ τὴν τοῦ Ἰησοῦ προσηγορίαν εὖ μάλα πνεύματι θείῳ προιδὼν πάλιν τινὸς ἐξαιρέτου προνομίας καὶ ταύτην ἀξιοῖ οὔποτε γοῦν πρότερον ἐκφωνηθὲν εἰς ἀνθρώπους, πρὶν ἢ Μωυσεῖ γνῶ·
 σθῆναι, τὸ τοῦ Ἰησοῦ πρόσρημα τούτῳ Μωυσῆς πρώτῳ καὶ μόνῳ περιτίθησιν, ὃν κατὰ τύπον αὗθις καὶ σύμβολον ἔγνω μετὰ τὴν αὐτοῦ τελευτὴν διαδεξόμενον τὴν κατὰ πάντων ἀρχήν.
 οὐ πρότερον γοῦν τὸν αὐτοῦ διάδοχον, τῆ τοῦ Ἰησοῦ κεχρημένον προσηγορίᾳ, ὀνόματι δὲ ἑτέρῳ τῷ Αὐσῆ, ὅπερ οἱ γεννήσαντες αὐτῷ τέθεινται, καλούμενον, Ἰησοῦν αὐτὸς ἀναγορεύει, γέρας ὥσπερ τίμιον, παντὸς πολὺ μεῖζον βασιλικοῦ διαδήματος, prophetic utterances concerning our Saviour Jesus ist, and in others have givena fuller demonation οf our statements concerning him,we willt content in the present work with what has nowen said.
 III.
 It is now time to demonstrate that the very es “ Jesus, ” and especially“ Christ,” honour by the ancient God- loving prophets themelves.
 Moses was himself the first to recognizew peculiarly august and glorious is thename of hrist, when he delivered the tradition of the typesd symbolsofheavenly things, and the mysterious ages, in accordance with the oracle which said him,“ See thou shalt make all thins according the type which was shown thee in the mount’’;
r in describingtheΗigh Ρriest οf God asaman supreme power, he calls him Christ, and, as a mark of honourand glory, surrounds with the name Christ this rank οf the High Priesthood, which with him surpassed all pre- eminence among men.
 us then he knew the divine character of“ Christ.
e himself also was inspired very clearly to foreseee title“ Jesus,” and it againhe endued with rivilege.
 Though before it was made known to oses it had never been previously pronounced men, Moses gave the title, Jesus,to him first,d to him alone, who, once more typically and bolically, he knewwould receive the rule οver after his death.
 His successor, at any rate, had οt previously usedthetitle“ Jesus,” but wasyanother name,“ Αuses,’’ which his parentshad iven him, and Moses calls him Jesus, as a precious ivilege greater than any royal crown, giving to τοὔνομα αὐτῷ δωρούμενος, ὅτι δὴ καὶ αὐτὸς ὁ τοῦ Ναυῆ Ἰησοῦς τοῦ σωτῆρος ἡμῶν τὴν εἰκόνα ἔφερεν, τοῦ μόνου μετὰ Μωυσέα καὶ τὸ συμπέρασμα τῆς δι’ ἐκείνου παραδοθείσης συμβολικῆς λατρείας, τῆς ἀληθοῦς καὶ καθαρωτάτης εὐσεβείας τὴν ἀρχὴν διαδεξαμένου.
 καὶ Μωυσῆς μὲν ταύτῃ πῃ δυσὶ τοῖς κατ’ αὐτὸν ἀρετῇ καὶ δόξη παρὰ πάντα τὸν λαὸν προφέρουσιν ἀνθρώποις, τῷ μὲν ἀρχιερεῖ, τῷ δὲ μετ’ αὐτὸν ἡγησομένῳ, τὴν τοῦ σωτῆρος ἡμῶν Ἰησοῦ χριστοῦ προσηγορίαν ἐπὶ τιμῇ τῇ μεγίστῃ περιτέθειται.
 σαφῶς δὲ καὶ οἱ μετὰ ταῦτα προφῆται ὀνομαστὶ τὸν Χριστὸν προανεφώνουν, ὁμοῦ τὴν μέλλουσαν ἔσεσθαι κατ’ αὐτοῦ συσκευὴν τοῦ Ἰουδαίων λαοῦ, ὁμοῦ δὲ καὶ τὴν τῶν ἐθνῶν δι’ αὐτοῦ κΛῆσιν προμαρτυρόμενοι, τοτὲ μὲν ὧδέ πως Ἱερεμίας λέγων“ πνεῦμα προσώπου ἡμῶν χριστὸς κύριος συνελήφθη ἐν ταῖς διαφθοραῖς αὐτῶν, οὗ εἴπομεν ἐν τῆ σκιᾷ αὐτοῦ ζησόμεθα ἐν τοῖς ἔθνεσιν,’’ ’ τοτὲ δὲ ἀμηχανῶν Δαυὶδ διὰ τούτων“ ἵνα τί ἐφρύαξαν ἔθνη καὶ λαοὶ ἐμελέτησαν κενά;
 παρέστησαν οἱ βασιλεῖς τῆς γῆς, καὶ οἱ ἄρχοντες συνήχθησαν ἐπὶ τὸ αὐτό, κατὰ τοῦ κυρίου καὶ κατὰ τοῦ Χριστοῦ αὐτοῦ”.
 οἷς ἑξῆς ἐπιλέγει ἐξ αὐτοῦ δὴ προσώπου τοῦ χριστοῦ“ κύριος εἶπεν πρός μεἴ’ υἱός μου εἶ αὖ, ἐγὼ σήμερον γεγέννηκά σε.
 αἴτησαι παρ’ ἐμοῦ, καὶ δώσω σοι ἔθνη τὴν κληρονομίαν σου, καὶ τὴν κατάσχεσίν ἀοῦ τὰ πέρατα τῆς γῆς.’
’ οὐ μόνους δὲ ἄρα τοὺς ἀρχιερωσύνῃ τετιμημένους, ἐλαίῳ σκευαστῷ τοῦ συμβόλου χριομένους ἕνεκα, τὸ τοῦ Χριστοῦ κατεκόσμει παρ’ Ἑβραίοις ὄνομα, ἀλλὰ him the name because Jesus the son of Nave1 himself bore the image οf οur Saviour who alone, after Moses and the completion of the symbolic worship2 delivered by Moses, did receive the rule of the true and pure religion.
 In this way Moses asa mark of the greatest honour surrounds with the name of our Saviour Jesus Christ the two men who in his day excelled all the people in virtue and glory— the Ηigh Ρriest and him who should rule after him.
 Clearly, too, did the later prophets foretell the Christ by name, giving their testimony beforehand alike to the future intrigue οf the people of the Jews against him, and to the calling οf the Gentiles through him.
 At one timeJeremiah says,“ The spirit of our face, Christ the Lord was takenin their corruptions, and we said we will live in his shadow among the ” Αt another time David in perplexity says as follows,“ Wherefore didthe heathen rage, and the peoples imagine vain things? The kings of the earth stood up, and the rulers were gathered together, against the Lord and against his” In the following verses he goes on to speak in the person of Christ himself,“The Lordsaidto me, Thou art my son, to-day haveI begotten thee.
 Αsk of me andI will give thee the heathen for thine inheritance and the uttermost parts of the earth for thy possession.
” Ηowever was not only those that were honoured with the Ηigh Priesthood, and anointed for the sake of the symbol with prepared οil, that were decorated among the Hebrews with the name “ Christ’ ’;
 but καὶ τοὺς βασιλέας, οὓς καὶ αὐτοὺς νεύματι θείῳ προφῆται χρίοντες εἰκονικούς τινας Χριστοὺς ἀπειργάζοντο, ὅτι δὴ καὶ αὐτοὶ τῆς τοῦ μόνου καὶ ἀληθοῦς χριστοῦ, τοῦ κατὰ πάντων βασιλεύοντος θείου λόγου, βασιλικῆς καὶ ἀρχικῆς ἐξουσίας τοὺς τύπους δι’ ἑαυτῶν ἔφερον.
 ἤδη δὲ καὶ αὐτῶν τῶν προφητῶν τινὰς διὰ χρίσματος χριστοὺς ἐν τύπῳ γεγονέναι παρειλήφαμεν, ὡς τούτους ἅπαντας τὴν ἐπὶ τὸν ἀληθῆ Χριστόν, τὸν ἔνθεον καὶ οὐράνιον λόγον, ἀναφορὰν ἔχειν, μόνον ἀρχιερέα τῶν ὅλων καὶ μόνον ἁπάσης κτίσεως βασιλέα καὶ μόνον προφητῶν ἀρχιπροφήτην τοῦ πατρὸς τυγχάνοντα.
 τούτου δ’ ἀπόδειξις τὸ μηδένα πω τῶν πάλαι διὰ τοῦ συμβόλου κεχρισμένων, μήτε ἱερέων μήτε βασιλέων μήτε μὴν προφητῶν, τοσαύτην ἀρετῆς ἐνθέου δύναμιν κτήσασθαι, ὅσην ὁ σωτὴρ καὶ κύριος ἡμῶν Ἰησοῦς ὁ μόνος καὶ ἀληθινὸς χριστὸς ἐπιδέδεικται.
 οὐδείς γέ τοι ἐκείνων, καίπερ ἀξιώματι καὶ τιμὴ ἐπὶ πλείσταις ὅσαις γενεαῖς παρὰ τοῖς οἰκείοις διαλαμψάντων, τοὺς ὑπηκόους πώποτε ἐκ τῆς περὶ αὐτοὺς εἰκονικῆς τοῦ χριστοῦ προσρήσεως Χριστιανοὺς ἐπεφήμισεν·
 ἀλλ’ οὐδὲ σεβάσμιός τινι τούτων πρὸς τῶν ὑπηκόων ὑπῆρξε τιμή·
 ἀλλ’ οὐδὲ μετὰ τὴν τελευτὴν τοσαύτη διάθεσις, ὡς καὶ ὑπεραποθνῄσκειν ἑτοίμως ἔχειν τοῦ τιμωμένου·
 ἀλλ’ οὐδὲ πάντων τῶν ἀνὰ τὴν οἰκουμένην ἐθνῶν περί τινα τῶν τότε τοσαύτη γέγονε κίνησις, ἐπεὶ μηδὲ τοσοῦτον ἐν ἐκείνοις ἢ τοῦ συμβόλου δύναμις οἵα τε ἢν ἐνεργεῖν, ὅσον ἡ τῆς ἀληθείας παράστασις διὰ τοῦ σωτῆρος ἡμῶν ἐνδεικνυμένη·
 ὃς οὔτε σύμβοΛα καὶ τύπους ἀρχιερωσύνης παρά του λαβών, also the kings, for they also, at thebiddingof God, re made Christs ina certain symbolism by the rophets who anointed them, inasmuch as they also re in themselves the types οf the royal and vereign power οf the οnly true Christ, the divine gos who reigns over all.
 we have also received he tradition that some οf the prophets themselvesby anointing already become Christs in type, eing that they all refer to the true Christ, the ivine and heavenly Logos, οf the world the only igh Priest, οf all creation the οnly king, of the rophets the only archprophet of the Father.
 The roof of this is that no οneof those symbolically ointed of old, whether priests or kings οr prophets, tained such power οf divine virtue as our Saviourd Lord, Jesus, the only real Christ, has exhibited.
 one indeed of them, though renownedin rank nd honour for so many generations among their people, ever gave the name of Christian to their bjects from the symbolical application to themlves of the name of Christ.
 The honour of worship as not paid to any of themby their subjects, nor d they hold them in such affection after their eath as to be ready to die for him whom they noured.
 For none of the men of those days as there such disturbance of all the nations throught all the world, since the power οf the symbol was incapable οf producing such an effect among them the presence of the reality manifested by our viour;
 for he received from none the symbol and of the Ηigh Priesthood, nor did he trace his ἀλλ’ οὐδὲ γένος τὸ περὶ σῶμα ἐξ ἱερωμένῶν κατάγων, οὐδ’ ἀνδρῶν δορυφορίαις ἐπὶ βασιλείαν προαχθεὶς οὐδὲ μὴν προφήτης ὁμοίως τοῖς πάλαι γενόμενος, οὐδ’ ἀξίας ὅλως ἤ τινος παρὰ Ἰουδαίοις τυχὼν προεδρίας, ὅμως τοῖς πᾶσιν, εἰ καὶ μὴ τοῖς συμβόλοις, ἀλλ’ αὐτῇ γε τῇ ἀληθείᾳ παρὰ τοῦ πατρὸς κεκόσμητο, οὐχ ὁμοίωνδ’ οὗν οἷς προειρήκαμεν, τυχών, πάντων ἐκείνων καὶ Χριστὸς μᾶλλον ἀνηγόρευται, καὶ ὡς ἂν μόνος καὶ ἀληθὴς αὐτὸς ὢν ὁ χριστὸς τοῦ θεοῦ, χριστιανῶν τὸν πάντα κόσμον, τῆς ὄντως σεμνῆς καὶ ἱερᾶς αὐτοῦ προσηγορίας, κατέπλησεν, οὐκέτι τύπους οὐδὲ εἰκόνας, ἀλλ’ αὐτὰς γυμνὰς ἀρετὰς καὶ βίον οὐράνιον αὐτοῖς ἀληθείας δόγμασιν τοῖς θιασώταις παραδούς, τό τε χρῖσμα, οὐ τὸ διὰ σωμάτων σκευαστόν, ἀλλ’ αὐτὸ δὴ πνεύματι θείῳ τὸ θεοπρεπές, μετοχὴ τῆς ἀγεννήτου καὶ πατρικῆς θεότητος ἀπειλήφει·
 ὃ καὶ αὐτὸ πάλιν Ἡσαΐας διδάσκει, ὡς ἂν ἐξ αὐτοῦ ὧδέ πως ἀναβοῶν τοῦ Χριστοῦ“ πνεῦμα κυρίου ἐπ’ ἐμέ, οὗ εἵνεκεν ἔχρισέν με·
 εὐαγγελίσασθαι πτωχοῖς ἀπέσταλκεν με, κήρυξαι αἰχμαλώτοις ἄφεσιν καὶ τυφλοῖς ἀνάβλεψιν.
” καἰ οὐ μόνος γε Ἡσαΐας, ἀλλὰ καὶ Δαυὶδ εἰς τὸ αὐτοῦ πρόσωπον ἀναφωνεῖ λέγων“ ὁ θρόνος ἀοῦ, ὁ θεός, εἰς τὸν αἰῶνα τοῦ αἰῶνος·
 ῥάβδος εὐθύτητος ἡ ῥάβδος τῆς βασιλείας σου.
 ἠγάπησας δικαιοσύνην καὶ ἐμίσησας ἀνομίαν·
 διὰ τοῦτο ἔχρισέν ἄε ὁ θεός, ὁ θεός σου ἔλαιον ἀγαλλιάσεως παρὰ τοὺς μετόχους σου’’·
 ἐν οἷς ὁ λόγος ἐν μὲν τῷ πρώτῳ στίχῳ θεὸν αὐτὸν ἐπιφημίζει, ἐν δὲ τῷ δευτέρῳ σκήπτρῳ βασιλικῷ τιμᾷ, εἶθ’ ἑξῆς ὑποβὰς μετὰ physical descent from the race οf priests, nor was he promoted to a kingdom by the armed force οf men, nor did he become a prophet in the same way as those οf οld, nor did he hold any rank at all or precedence among the Jews, yet with all these he had been adorned, not in symbols, but in actual reality by the Father.
 Though he did not obtain the honours οf which wehave spoken before, he is called Christ more than any of them, and inasmuch as he is himself the only true Christ of God, he filledthe whole world with Christians—his truly reverendand sacred name.
 He no longergave to his initiatestypes or imagesbutthe uncovered virtues themselves and the heavenly life, in the actual doctrines οf truth, and he has receivedthe chrism,not that whichisprepared materially 1butthe divine anointing itself with the spirit of God,by sharing in the unbegotten divinity of the Father.
 Again, Isaiah teaches this very point, for in one place he exclaims as if from Christ himself,“ The spirit of the Lordwas upon me, wherefore he anointed me:
 he sent meto preach the gospelto the poor, to announce release to prisoners, and sight to the blind.
 ” 2 Αnd οnly Isaiah but also David speaks with reference tohimand says,“ Thy throne,o God,is for everand ever,a rod of uprightness is the rod of thy kingdom.
 Thou didst love righteousness and didst hate iniquity.
 For this cause God, even thy God, anointed thee with the oil of gladness above thy ” In this the text calls him God in the first verse, and in the second honours him with the royal sceptre, and then goes on, after royal and τὴν ἔνθεον καὶ βασιΛικὴν δύναμιν τρίτη τάξει Χριστὸν αὐτὸν γεγονότα, ἐλαίῳ οὐ τῷ ἐξ ὕλης σωμάτων, ἀλλὰ τῷ ἐνθέῳ τῆς ἀγαλλιάσεως ἠλειμμένον, παρίστησιν·
 παρ’ ὃ καὶ τὸ ἐξαίρετον αὐτοῦ καὶ πολὺ κρεῖττον καὶ διάφορον τῶν πάλαι διὰ τῶν εἰκόνων σωματικώτερον κεχρισμένων ὑποσημαίνει.
 καὶ ἀλλαχοῦ δὲ ὁ αὐτὸς ὧδέ πως τὰ περὶ αὐτοῦ δηλοῖ λέγων ἴ’ εἶπεν ὁ κύριος τῷ κυρίῳ μου·
‘ κάθου ἐκ δεξιῶν μου, ἕως ἂν θῶ τοὺς ἐχθρούς σου ὑποπόδιον τῶν ποδῶν σου,’’’ καὶ“ ἐκ γαστρὸς πρὸ ἑωσφόρου ἐγέννησά σε.
 ὤμοσεν κύριος καὶ οὐ μεταμεληθήσεται·
 σὺ εἶ ἱερεὺς εἰς τὸν αἰῶνα κατὰ τὴν τάξιν Μελχισεδέκ.
 ” οὗτος δὲ εἰσάγεται ἐν τοῖς ἱεροῖς λόγοις ὁ Μελχισεδὲκ ἱερεὺς τοῦ θεοῦ τοῦ ὑψίστου, οὐκ ἐν σκευαστῷ τινι χρίσματι ἀναδεδειγμένος, ἀλλ’ οὐδὲ διαδοχῇ γένους προσήκων τῆ καθ’ Ἑβραίους ἱερωσύνη·
 δι’ ὃ κατὰ τὴν αὐτοῦ τάξιν, ἀλλ’ οὐ κατὰ τὴν τῶν ἄλλων σύμβολα καὶ τύπους ἀνειληφότων χριστὸς καὶ ἱερεὺς μεθ’ ὅρκου παραλήψεως ὁ σωτὴρ ἡμῶν ἀνηγόρευται.
 ὅθεν οὐδὲ σωματικῶς παρὰ Ἰουδαίοις χρισθέντα αὐτὸν ἢ ἰατορίᾳ παραδίδωσιν, ἀλλ’ οὐδ’ ἐκ φυλῆς τῶν ἱερωμένων γενόμενον, ἐξ αὐτοῦ δὲ θεοῦ πρὸ ἑωσφόρου μέν, τοῦτ᾿ ἐστὶν πρὸ τῆς τοῦ κόσμου συστάσεως, οὐσιωμένον, ἀθάνατον δὲ καὶ ἀγήρω τὴν ἱερωσύνην εἰς τὸν ἄπειρον αἰῶνα διακατέχοντα.
 τῆς δ’ εἰς αὐτὸν γενομένης ἀσωμάτου καὶ ἐνθέου χρίσεως μέγα καὶ ἐναργὲς τεκμήριον τὸ μόνον αὐτὸν ἐξ ἁπάντων τῶν πώποτε εἰς ἔτι καὶ νῦν παρὰ πᾶσιν ἀνθρώποις divine power, to presenthimin the third place as having become Christ, anointed not with oil ade of materialsubstances but with the divine “ οil οf gladness.
” Αnd in addition to this dicateshis peculiar distinctionand superiority to thosewho in the pasthad been more materially anointed as types.
 1 And in another plaee too the same David explains his position as follows :
“ The Lord saidto my Lord, Sit thouon my right hand, untilI make thine enemies the footstool of thy eet.
” Αnd,“ Before the day- starI begat from the womb.
 The Lord sware and will not repent, ou arta priest for ever after the οrder of Melchisedek.
” Νοw this Melchisedek is introduced in he sacred books as priest of the most high God, ithout having been so marked out by any material ction, or even as belonging by racial descenttoe priesthood οf the Ηebrews.
 For this reason οur aviour has been called Christ and priest, on the uthority of an οath, according to his order and not according to that ofthe others Who received symbols nd types.
 For this reason, too,the narrative does ot relate that he was anointed physically by the ews or even that he was or the tribe of those who old the priesthood, but that he receivedhis beingmGod himself before the day- star, that is toy, before the construction οf the world, and holdsis priesthood to boundless eternity, ageless and ortal.
 Α weighty and clear proof of the aterial 2 and divine anointing effected on him thathe alone, out of all who have ever yet been καθ’ ὅλου τοῦ κόσμου Χριστὸν ἐπιφημίζεσθαι ὁμοΛογεῖσθαί τε καὶ μαρτυρεῖσθαι πρὸς ἁπάντων ἐπὶ τῇ προσηγορίᾳ παρά τε Ἕλλησι καὶ βαρβάροις μνημονεύεσθαι, καὶ εἰς ἔτι νῦν παρὰ τοῖς ἀνὰ τὴν οἰκουμένην αὐτοῦ θιασώταις τιμᾶσθαι μὲν ὡς βασιλέα, θαυμάζεσθαι δὲ ὑπὲρ προφήτην, δοξάζεσθαί τε ὡς ἀληθῆ καὶ μόνον θεοῦ ἀρχιερέα, καὶ ἐπὶ πᾶσι τούτοις, οἷα θεοῦ λόγον προόντα καὶ πρὸ αἰώνων ἁπάντων οὐσιωμένον τήν τε σεβάσμιον τιμὴν παρὰ τοῦ πατρὸς ὑπειληφότα, καὶ προσκυνεῖσθαι ὡς θεόν·
 τό γε μὴν πάντων παραδοξότατον, ὅτι μὴ φωναῖς αὐτὸ μόνον καὶ ῥημάτων ψόφοις αὐτὸν γεραίρομεν οἱ καθωσιωμένοι αὐτῷ, ἀλλὰ καὶ πάση διαθέσει ψυχῆς, ὡς καὶ αὐτῆς προτιμᾶν τῆς ἑαυτῶν ζωῆς τὴν εἰς αὐτὸν μαρτυρίαν.
 IV.
 Ταῦτα μὲν οὗν ἀναγκαίως πρὸ τῆς ἱστορίας ἐνταῦθά μοι κείσθω, ὡς ἂν μὴ νεώτερόν τις εἶναι νομίσειεν τὸν σωτῆρα καὶ κύριον ἡμῶν Ἰησοῦν τὸν χριστὸν διὰ τοὺς τῆς ἐνσάρκου πολιτείας αὐτοῦ χρόνους.
 ἵνα δὲ μηδέ τὴν διδασκαλίαν αὐτοῦ νέαν εἶναι καὶ ξένην, ὡς ἄν ὑπὸ νέου καὶ μηδὲν τοὺς λοιποὺς διαφέροντος ἀνθρώπους συστᾶσαν, ὑπονοήσειέν τις, φέρε, βραχέα καὶ περὶ τούτου διαλάβωμεν.
 τῆς μὲν γὰρ τοῦ σωτῆρος ἡμῶν Ἰησοῦ Χριστοῦ παρουσίας νεωστὶ πᾶσιν ἀνθρώποις ἐπιλαμψάσης, νέον ὁμολογουμένως ἔθνος, οὐ μικρὸν οὐδ’ ἀσθενὲς οὐδ’ ἐπὶ γωνίας ποι γῆς ἱδρυμένον, ἀλλὰ καὶ πάντων τῶν ἐθνῶν πολυανθρωπότατόν τε καἰ θεοσεβέστατον ταύτῃ τε ἀνώλεθρον καὶ ἀήττητον, ἧ καὶ εἰς ἀεὶ τῆς παρὰ θεοῦ βοηθείας τυγχάνει χρόνων προθεσμίαις ἀρρήτοις ἀθρόως οὕτως ἀναπέφηνεν, τὸ παρὰ τοῖς πᾶσι τῇ τοῦ Χριστοῦ until now, is called Christ among all men throughout the whole whole;
 that under this title he is confessed and borne witness to by all, and is mentioned thus by Jews, Greeks, and barbarians;
 that until is present day he is honoured honoured by his worshippers throughout the world as king, wondered at more ana Ρrophet,and glorified as the true and only High PriestοfGod, and, above all, as theLogosof God, pre- existent, having his being before all ages, and having received the right οf reverence from the Father, and thathe is worshipped as God.
 Strangest of all, we who have been consecratedto him, honour himnot οnly with our voices and with the sound of words, but with the whole dispositionof our soul, so as to value testimony to him more than our very life itself.
 IV.
 Let these observations suffice me, as needed before beginning the history, that noonemight think orourSaviourand Lord, Jesus Christ, as a novelty because of the dateofhis ministry in the either was new and strange, inasmuch as it was put together by a youth no better than the rest of men, come, let us discuss this point briefly.
 For when the advcnt of our Saviour, Jesus Christ, reeently shone forthon all men, it was confessedly a new race which has thus appearedin such numbers, in accordance withthe ineffable propheciesof the date, and is honoured by all by the name of Christ, but itis not littlenor weak, nor founded in some obscure corner οf the earth, earth, but the most populous of alland invincible in thatit ever finds help from God.
 προσηγορίᾳ τετιμημένον.
 τοῦτο καὶ προφητῶν κατεπλάγη τις, θείου πνεύματος ὀφθαλμῷ τὸ μέλλον ἔσεσθαι προθεωρήσας, ὡς καὶ τάδε ἀναφθέγξασθαι“ τίς ἤκουσεν τοιαῦτα, καὶ τις ἐλάλη οὕτως;
 εἰ ὤδινεν γῆ ἐν μιᾷ ἡμέρᾳ, καὶ εἰ ἐτέχθη ἔθνος εἰς ἅπαξ.
 ” ὑποσημαίνει δέ πως καὶ τὴν μέλλουσαν ὁ αὐτὸς προσηγορίαν, λέγων “ τοῖς δὲ δουλεύουσίν μοι κληθήσεται ὄνομα καινόν, δ’ εὐλογηθήσεται ἐπὶ τῆς γῆς. ’
 ’ ἀλλ’ εἰ καὶ νέοι σαφῶς ἡμεῖς καὶ τοῦτο καινὸν ὄντως ὄνομα τὸ χριστιανῶν ἀρτίως παρὰ πᾶσιν ἔθνεσιν γνωρίζεται, ὁ βίοςδ’ οὖν ὅμως καὶ τῆς ἀγωγῆς ὁ τρόπος αὐτοῖς εὐσεβείας δόγμασιν ὅτι μὴ ἔναγχος ὑφ’ ἡμῶν ἐπιπέπΛασται, ἐκ πρώτηςδ’ ὡς εἰπεῖν ἀνθρωπογονίας φυσικαῖς ἐννοίαις τῶν πάλαι θεοφιλῶν κατωρθοῦτο, ὧδέ πως ἐπιδείξομεν.
 οὐ νέον, ἀλλὰ καὶ παρὰ πᾶσιν ἀνθρώποις ἀρχαιότητι τετιμημένον ἔθνος, τοῖς πᾶσι καὶ αὐτὸ γνώριμον, τό Ἑβραίων τυγχάνει.
 λόγοι δὴ παρὰ τούτῳ καὶ γράμματα παλαιοὺς ἄνδρας περιέχουσιν, σπανίους μὲν καὶ ἀριθμῷ βραχεῖς, ἀλλ’ ὅμως εὐσεβείᾳ καὶ δικαιοσύνῃ καὶ πάσῃ τῇ λοιπῇ διενεγκόντας ἀρετῇ, πρὸ μέν γε τοῦ κατακλυσμοῦ διαφόρους, μετὰ δὲ καὶ τοῦτον ἑτέρους, τῶν τε τοῦ Νῶε παίδων καὶ ἀπογόνων ἀτὰρ καὶ τὸν Ἀβραάμ, ὃν ἀρχηγὸν καὶ προπάτορα ἁφῶν αὐτῶν παῖδες Ἑβραίων αὐχοῦσι πάντας δὴ ἐκείνους ἐπὶ δικαιοσύνῃ μεμαρτυρημένους, ἐξ αὐτοῦ Ἀβραὰμ ἐπὶ τὸν πρῶτον ἀνιοῦσιν ἄνθρωπον, ἔργῳ Χρι- It was at this that one ofthe prophets was amazed when, by the eye ofthe divine spirit, he foresaw the future which was to be, so that he exclaimed,“ Who heard these things and who spoke thus? Did the earth travailin one day, and wasa nation born at once?” Αnd the same writer also indicatesin one placeitsfuture title, saying,“ Αndanew name shall be called on those who serve me, which shall be blessed on the earth.
” But evenifwe are clearly new, and this really fresh name of Christians is recently known among all nations, nevertheless our life and method of conduet, in accordaneewiththe precepts of religion, has not been recentlyinventedby us,but from the first creation of man, so to speak, has been upheld by the natural concepts of the men of old who were the friends of God, as we will here demonstrate.
 The race of the Hebrews is not new andis itself well known to all.
 Now, stories and documents belonging to it concern ancient men, few and scarcein number,yet remarkable for piety and righteousness and for all other virtues.
 Divers οf them, indeed, were before the flood, and afterit were others, and,( to say nothingofthe children and descendants of Νoah), especially Αbraham, whom the children of the Hebrews boast as their οwn originator and ancestor.
 If the linebe traced back from Αbraham to the first man, anyone who should describe those who have obtained a good testimony for righteousness, as Christians in fact, στιανούς, εἰ καὶ μὴ ὀνόματι, προσειπών τις οὐκ ἂν ἐκτὸς βάλοι τῆς ἀληθείας.
 ὃ γάρ τοι δηλοῦν ἐθέλοι τοὔνομα, τὸν Χριστιανὸν ἄνδρα διὰ τῆς τοῦ Χριστοῦ γνώσεως καὶ διδασκαλίας σωφροσύνῃ καὶ δικαιοσύνῃ καρτερίᾳ τε βίου καὶ ἀρετῆς ἀνδρείᾳ εὐσεβείας τε ὁμολογίᾳ ἑνὸς καὶ μόνου τοῦ ἐπὶ πάντων θεοῦ διαπρέπειν, τοῦτο πᾶν ἐκείνοις οὐ χεῖρον ἡμῶν ἐσπουδάζετο.
 οὔτ’ οὖν σώματος αὐτοῖς περιτομῆς ἔμελεν, ὅτι μηδὲ ἡμῖν, οὐ σαββάτων ἐπιτηρήσεως, ὅτι μηδὲ ἡμῖν, ἀλλ’ οὐδὲ τῶν τοιῶνδε τροφῶν παραφυλακῆς οὐδὲ τῶν ἄλλων διαστολῆς, ὅσα τοῖς μετέπειτα πρῶτος ἁπάντων Μωυσῆς ἀρξάμενος ἐν συμβόλοις τελεῖσθαι παραδέδωκεν, ὅτι μηδὲ νῦν χριστιανῶν τὰ τοιαῦτα·
 ἀλλὰ καὶ σαφῶς αὐτὸν ᾔδεσαν τὸν χριστὸν τοῦ θεοῦ, εἴ γε ὦφθαι μὲν τῷ Ἀβραάμ, χρηματίσαι 2.
 35, 1.
 δὲ τῶ Ἰσαάκ, λελαληκέναι δὲ τῷ Ἰσραήλ, Μωυσεῖ τε καὶ τοῖς μετὰ ταῦτα προφήταις ὡμιληκέναι προδέδεικται·
 ἔνθεν αὐτοὺς δὴ τοὺς θεοφιλεῖς ἐκείνους εὕροις ἂν καὶ τῆς τοῦ Χριστοῦ κατηξιωμένους ἐπωνυμίας, κατὰ τὴν φάσκουσαν περὶ αὐτῶν φωνήν “ μὴ ἅψησθε τῶν Χριστῶν μου, καὶ ἐν τοῖς προφήταις μου μὴ πονηρεύεσθε” ὥστε σαφῶς πρώτην ἡγεῖσθαι δεῖν καὶ πάντων παλαιοτάτην τε καὶ ἀρχαιοτάτην θεοσεβείας εὕρεσιν αὐτῶν ἐκείνων τῶν ἀμφὶ τὸν Ἀβραὰμ θεοφιλῶν ἀνδρῶν τὴν ἀρτίως διὰ τῆς τοῦ Χριστοῦ διδα ἔθνεσιν κατηγγελμένην.
 εἰ δὲ δὴ μακρῷ ποθ’ ὕστερον περιτομῆς φασι τὸν Ἀβραὰμ ἐντολὴν εἰληφέναι, ἀλλὰ πρό γε ταύτης δικαιοσύνην διὰ πίστεως μαρτυρηθεὶς ἀνείρηται, ὧδέ πως τοῦ θείου φάσκοντος κοντὸς λόγου“ ἐπίστευσεν δὲ Ἀβραὰμ ifnotin name, would not shoot wide of the truth.
 Fοr the name signifies that through the knowledge of Christ and his teaching the Christian man excels sobriety and righteousness, in control of life and courageous virtue, and in the confession that God verall is but one;
 and for zeal in all thistheyare not inferiorto us.
 They had no care for bodily circumcision any more than we, nor for the keekping Sabbaths any more than we, nor for abstinenee from certain foods nor the distinction between others( such as Moses afterwards first began to hand down their successors) nor for symbolic ceremony any more than christians care for such things now, but they clearly knew him as the Christ of God, seeing at it has aheady been demonstrated that he peared to Αbraham, addressed Isaac, spoke to srael, and conversed with Mosesandthe later prophets.
 Whence you would find that those Godlving men obtained even the name οf Christ accordto the wordspoken concerning them,“ Touch not my Christs and act not wickedly among my prophets.
” So thatitmust cleariybe held that the announcementtoall the Gentiles, recently made through the teaching of Christ, is the very first and most aneient and antique discovery of true religion by Αbraham and those lovers of God who followed him.
 Αnd even if they say that Αbraham it hasbeen related that, before this command, he receiveda good testimonyforrighteousness through faith, as thedivine word says,“ Αnd Αbraham be- τῷ θεῷ, καὶ ἐλογίσθη αὐτῷ εἰς δικαιοσύνην.
” καὶ δὴ τοιούτῳ πρὸ τῆς περιτομῆς γεγονότι χρησμὸς ὑπὸ τοῦ φήναντος ἑαυτὸν αὐτῷ θεοῦ( οὗτος δ’ ἢν αὐτὸς ὁ Χριστός, ὁ τοῦ θεοῦ λόγος) περὶ τῶν ἐν τοῖς μετέπειτα χρόνοις τὸν ὅμοιον αὐτῷ δικαιοῦσθαι τρόπον μελλόντων ῥήμασιν αὐτοῖς προεπήγγελται λέγων“ καὶ ἐνευλογηθήσονται ἐν σοὶ πᾶσαι αἱ φυλαὶ τῆς γῆς,,, καὶ ὡς ὅτι“ ἕαται εἰς ἔθνος μέγα καὶ πολύ, καὶ ἐνευλογηθήσονται ἐν αὐτῷ πάντα τὰ ἔθνη τῆς γῆς. ’
 ’ τούτῳ δὲ καὶ ἐπιστῆσαι εἰς ἡμᾶς ἐκπεπληρωμένῳ πάρεστιν.
 πίστει μὲν γὰρ ἐκεῖνος τῆ εἰς τὸν ὀφθέντα αὐτῷ τοῦ θεοῦ λόγον τὸν χριστὸν δεδικαίωτο, πατρῴας μὲν ἀποστὰς δεισιδαιμονίας καὶ πλάνης βίου προτέρας, ἕνα δὲ τὸν ἐπὶ πάντων ὁμοΛογήσας θεὸν καὶ τοῦτον ἔργοις ἀρετῆς οὐχὶ δὲ θρησκείᾳ νόμου τοῦ μετὰ ταῦτα Μωυσέως θεραπεύσας, τοιούτῳ τε ὄντι εἴρητο ὅτι δὴ πᾶσαι αἱ φυλαὶ τῆς γῆς καὶ πάντα τὰ ἔθνη ἐν αὐτῷ εὐλογηθήσεται·
 ἔργοις δὲ λόγων ἐναργεστέροις ἐπὶ τοῦ παρόντος παρὰ μόνοις χριστιανοῖς καθ’ ὅλης τῆς οἰκουμένης ἀσκούμενος ἐκεῖνος ὁ τῆς θεοσεβείας τοῦ Ἀβραὰμ ἀναπέφηνε τρόπος.
 τί δὴ οὗν λοιπὸν ἐμποδὼν ἂν εἴη, μὴ οὐχὶ ἕνα καὶ τὸν αὐτὸν βίον τε καὶ τρόπον εὐσεβείας ἡμῖν τε τοῖς ἀπὸ χριστοῦ καὶ τοῖς πρόπαλαι θεοφιλέσιν ὁμολογεῖν;
 ὥστε μὴ νέαν καὶ ξένην, ἀλλ’ εἰ δεῖ φάναι ἀληθεύοντα, πρώτην ὑπάρχειν καὶ μόνην καὶ ἀληθῆ κατόρθωσιν εὐσεβείας τὴν διὰ τῆς τοῦ Χριστοῦ διδασκαλίας παραδοθεῖσαν ἡμῖν ἀποδείκνυσθαι.
 καὶ ταῦτα μὲν ὧδε ἐχέτω.
 lieved God and it was reckoned tohim for”Αnd to him, just as he was, before circumcision, was the oraele given by the God who showed himself to him( and thiswastheChrist himself, the word of God), concerning those who in time to come would be justified in the same manner as himself, inthefollowing promise,“ Αnd in thee shall all the tribes of the earth be” and,“ It shallbea greatand numerous nation, and all the nations of the earth shall be blessed in” Νow thisis obviously intelligible as fulffiled in us;
 for it was by faith towards the Logos of God, the Christ who had appearedto him, that he was justified, and gave up the superstition οf his fathers,and his rmer erroneous life, and confessedthe God whoisover all tobeone;
 and him he served by virtuous deeds, not by the worship of thelaw of Moses, ho eame later.
 To him, just hewas then, wast said that all the tribesofthe earth and allthe nations 1 will be blessed in him;
 and more clearly than auy words do faets show that at the present moment it is only among Christians throughout the whole world that the manner of religion which was braham's can actually be foundin practice.
 What bjection then can there be to admitting that the fe and pious conduct of us, who belong to Christ, and οf the God- loving men οf old is one and the same? us we have demonstrated that the practice of ty handed down by the teaching of Christ is not ew strange, but,if one must speak truthfully, rimitive, unique, and true.
 Αnd let this suffice.
 V.
 Φέρε δὲ ἤδη, μετὰ τὴν δέουσαν προκατασκε τῆς προτεθείσης ἡμῖν ἐκκλησιαστικῆς ἰατορίας λοιπὸν ἀπὸ τῆς ἐνσάρκου τοῦ σωτῆρος ἡ ἐπιφανείας οἷά τινος ὁδοιπορίας ἐφαψώμεθα, τοῦ λόγου πατέρα θεὸν καὶ τὸν δηλούμενον αὐ Ἰησοῦν χριστὸν τὸν σωτῆρα καὶ κύριον ἡμῶν, οὐράνιον τοῦ θεοῦ λόγον, βοηθὸν ἡμῖν καὶ αυνε τῆς κατὰ τὴν διήγησιν ἀληθείας ἐπικαλεσάμε ἢν δὴ οὗν τοῦτο δεύτερον καὶ τεσσαρακοστὸν ἔ τῆς Αὐγούστου βασιΛείας, Αἰγύπτουδ’ ὑποτα καὶ τελευτῆς Ἀντωνίου καὶ Κλεοπάτρας, εἰς ὑστάτην ἡ κατ’ Αἴγυπτον τῶν Πτολεμαίων λῆξε δυναστεία, ὄγδοον ἔτος καὶ εἰκοστόν, ὀπὴν ὁ σωτὴρ καὶ κύριος ἡμῶν Ἰησοῦς ὁ χριστὸς τῆς τότε πρώτης ἀπογραφῆς, ἡγεμονεύο Κυρινίου τῆς Συρίας, ἀκολούθως ταῖς περὶ αὐ προφητείαις ἐν Βηθλεὲμ γεννᾶται τῆς Ἰουδα ταύτης δὲ τῆς κατὰ Κυρίνιον ἀπογραφῆς τῶν παρ’ Ἑβραίοις ἐπισημότατος ἱστορικῶνΦ ὑίος Ἰώσηπος μνημονεύει, καὶ ἄλλην ἐπισυνά ἱστορίαν περὶ τῆς τῶν Γαλιλαίων κατὰ αὐτοὺς ἐπιφυείσης χρόνους αἱρέσεως, ἧς καὶ ἡμῖν ὁ Λουκᾶς ἐν ταῖς Πράξεσιν μνήμην ὧδέ λέγων πεποίηται“ μετὰ τοῦτον ἀνέστη Ἴουv.
 So then, after the neeessary preliminaries to the historyof the Church proposedby us,let us begin, as if startinga journey, with the appearanee οf our Saviourin the flesh, after invoking God, the Fatherof the Logos, and Jesus Christ himself, our Saviourand Lord,the heavenly Logos of God, to give us help and assistance to truth in the narra-(??) ive.
 It was, then, the forty- second yearof the reignof Augustus, Augustus, 1 and the twenty- eighth year after the submission of Egypt and the death of Αntony and Cleopatra( and with her the Egyptian dynasty of the Ptolemies came to an end), when our Saviour and Lord Jesus Christ, in aecordance withtheprophecies concerning him, was born in Bethlehem of Judaea at the time of the census which then hrst took place, while Quirinus was Governor of Syria.
 This census in the timeof Quirinius,2 Flavius Josephus, the most famous of the historians among the Hebrews, also mentions, and joins to the narrative another coneerning the seet of the Galileans which arose at the same time.
 Our own Luke has also mentioned this in one placein the Acts, saying “ Αfter this man arose Judas the Galilean, in the ὁ Γαλιλαῖος ἐν ταῖς ἡμέραις τῆς ἀπογραφῆς, καἰ ἀπέστησε λαὸν ὀπίσω αὐτοῦ·
 κἀκεῖνος ἀπώλετο, καὶ πάντες δάοι ἐπείσθησαν αὐτῷ, διεσκορπίσθησαν.
 ” τούτοις δ οὖν καὶ ὁ δεδηλωμένος ἐν ὀκτωκαιδεκάτῳ τῆς Ἀρχαιολογίας συνᾴδων ταῦτα παρατίθεται κατὰ λέξιν·
 “ Κυρίνιος δὲ τῶν εἰς τὴν βουλὴν συναγομένων, ἀνὴρ τάς τε ἄλλας ἀρχὰς ἐπιτετελεκὼς καὶ διὰ πασῶν ὁδεύσας ὕπατος γενέσθαι τά τε ἄλλα ἀξιώματι μέγας, σὺν ὀλίγοις ἐπὶ Συρίας παρῆν, ὑπὸ Καίσαρος δικαιοδότης τοῦ ἔθνους ἀπεσταλμένος καὶ τιμητὴς τῶν οὐσιῶν γενησόμενος.
” καὶ μετὰ βραχέα φησίν·
 “ Ἰούδας Γαυλανίτης ἀνὴρ ἐκ πόλεως ὄνομα Γαμαλά, Σάδδοκον Φαρισαῖον προσλαβόμενος, ἠπείγετο ἐπὶ ἀποστάσει, τήν τε ἀποτίμησιν οὐδὲν ἄλλο ἢ ἄντικρυς δουλείαν ἐπιφέρειν λέγοντες καὶ τῆς ἐλευθερίας ἐπ’ ἀντιλήψει παρακαλοῦντες τὸ ἔθνος.
” καὶ ἐν τῇ δευτέρᾳ δὲ τῶν ἱστοριῶν τοῦ Ἱουδαϊκοῦ πολέμου περὶ τοῦ αὐτοῦ ταῦτα γράφει·
“ ἐπὶ τούτου τις ἀνὴρ Γαλιλαῖος Ἰούδας ὄνομα εἰς ἀποστασίαν ἐνῆγε τοὺς ἐπιχωρίους, κακίζων εἰ φόρον τε ῾Ρωμαίοις τελεῖν ὑπομενοῦσιν καὶ μετὰ τὸν θεὸν οἴσουσι θνητοὺς δεσπότας.
 ” ταῦτα ὁ Ἰώσηπος.
 VI.
 Τηνικαῦτα δὲ καὶ τοῦ Ἰουδαίων ἔθνους Ἡρῴδοῦ πρώτου τὸ γένος ἀλλοφύλου διειληφότος τὴν βασιλείαν ἡ διὰ Μωυσέως περιγραφὴν ἐλάμβανεν προφητεία“ οὐκ ἐκλείψειν ἄρχοντα ἐξ Ἰούδα οὐδὲ ἡγούμενον ἐκ τῶν μηρῶν αὐτοῦ” φήσασα,“ ἕως ἂν ἔλθῃ ᾧ ἀπόκειται,” ὃν καὶ ἀποφαίνει προσδοκίαν ἔσεσθαι ἐθνῶν.
 ἀτελῆ γέ τοι τὰ τῆς προρ- days or the census, and led away the people after him and he perished and all who obeyed him were” In agrecment with this, in the eighteenth book of the Antiquities the writer referred to also gives the following detaih:
“ Αnd Quirinius, one of those calledto the Senate, who hadfilled the οther officesand passed through all of themto become Consul, and was otherwise οf high rank, reached Syria witha small staff, having been sent by caesar to administer the people and to make a valuation of their” And a little later he says,“ Αnd Judas, the Gaulonite, of thecity called Gamala, took Withhim Zadok,a Pharisee,and insugateda revolt,for they said that the valuation led to nothing but plain slavery, and theycalled on the Ρeοpleto rally for” Αnd inhesecond book oftheHistory of the JenuishWarte writes concerningthe same man,“ At this timea Galielean called Judas incited the inhabitant to revolt, calling them cowards to suffer the payment οf tribute to the Romans, and after serving God to endure mortal’’ So far Josephus.
 VI.
 Νow at this time, when Ηerod was the first foreigner to hold the sovereignty ofthe Jewish nation, the prophecy made through Moses that“Arule shall not fail from Judah nora leader fromhis loins until he come for whom it is reserved’’ 1 beganbe fulmled.
 Moses also shows that this one will the“ expectation of the” Obviously the terms of the prediction were unfulfilled so long ῥήσεως ἦν καθ’ ὂν ὑπὸ τοῖς οἰκείοις τοῦ ἔθνους ἄρχουσι διάγειν αὐτοῖς ἐξῆν χρόνον, ἄνωθεν ἐξ αὐτοῦ Μωυσέως καταρξαμένοις καὶ εἰς τὴν Αὐγούστου βασιλείαν διαρκέσασιν, καθ’ ὃν πρῶτος ἀλλόφυλος Ἡρῴδης τὴν κατὰ Ἰουδαίων ἐπιτρέπεται ὑπὸ Ῥωμαίων ἀρχήν, ὡς μὲν Ἰώσηπος παραδίδωσιν, Ἰδουμαῖος ὢν κατὰ πατέρα τὸ γένος Ἀράβιος δὲ κατὰ μητέρα, ὡςδ’ Ἀφρικανός( οὐχ ὁ τυχὼν δὲ καὶ οὗτος γέγονε συγγραφεύς), φασὶν οἱ τὰ κατ’ αὐτὸν ἀκριβοῦντες Ἀντίπατρον( τοῦτον δ’ εἶναι αὐτῷ πατέρα) Ἡρῴδου τινὸς Ἀσκαλωνίτου τῶν περὶ τὸν νεὼ τοῦ Ἀπόλλωνος ἱεροδούλων καλουμένων γεγονέναι·
 ὃς Ἀντίπατρος ὑπὸ Ἰδουμαίων λῃστῶν παιδίον αἰχμαλωτισθεὶς αὺν ἐκείνοις ἦν, διὰ τὸ μὴ δύνασθαι τὸν πατέρα πτωχὸν ὄντα καταθέσθαι ὑπὲρ αὐτοῦ, ἐντραφεὶς δὲ τοῖς ἐκείνων ἔθεσιν ὕστερον Ὑρκανῷ τῷ Ἰουδαίων ἀρχιερεῖ φιλοῦται.
 τούτου γίνεται ὁ ἐπὶ τοῦ αωτῆρος ἡμῶν Ἡρῴδης.
 εἰς δὴ οὖν τὸν τοιοῦτον τῆς Ἰουδαίων περιελθούσης βασιλείας, ἐπὶ θύραις ἤδη καὶ ἢ τῶν ἐθνῶν ἀκολούθως τῆ προφητείᾳ προαδοκία παρῆν, ἅτε διαλελοιπότων ἐξ ἐκείνου τῶν παρ’ αὐτοῖς ἐξ αὐτοῦ Μωυσέως κατὰ διαδοχὴν ἀρξάντων τε καὶ ἡγησαμένων.
 πρὸ μέν γε τῆς αἰχμαλωσίας αὐτῶν καὶ τῆς εἰς Βαβυλῶνα μεταναστάσεως ἐβασιΛεύοντο, ἀπὸ Σαοὺλ πρώτου καἰ Δαυὶδ ἀρξάμενοι·
 πρὸ δὲ τῶν βασιλέων ἄρχοντες αὐτοὺς διεῖπον, οἱ προσαγορευόμενοι κριταί, ἄρξαν·
 καὶ αὐτοὶ μετὰ Μωυσέα καὶ τὸν τούτου διάδοχον Ἰησοῦν·
 μετὰ δὲ τὴν ἀπὸ Βαβυλῶνος ἐπάνοδον οὐ διέλιπον πολιτείᾳ χρώμενοι ἀριστοκρατικῇ μετὰ ὀλιγαρχίας( οἱ γὰρ ἱερεῖς προεστήκεσαν τῶν as it was possible for the Jews to live under the native rulers of the nation, beginning with Moses himself and lasting down to the reign of Augusturs;
 hut in his time the first foreigner, Ηerod, was entrusted by the Romans with the govemment οf the Jews.
 Ηe was, as Josephus relates, an Idumaean οn his father's side andan Αrab on his mother's, but according to Αffieanus( nor washeany ordinary historian) those Who give accurate information concerning Herod say that Antipater( he washis father)Was the sonοfa certainΗerod of Ascalon, and οne οf those called hierodouloi1 in the temple of Αpοllο.
 This Αntipater was eaptured asa child by Idumaean brogands, and stayed with them because his father Was unable on aeeount of poverty to pay ransom for him.
 Ηe was brought up in their customs and later οn was befriended hy Hyrcanus the high priest of the Jews.
 Ηis child was the Herod of our Saviour's time.
 When therefore the kingdom of the Jews came to sueha man as this the expectation of the Gentiles, in accordance with the propheey, was already at the door, inasumuch as the succession from Moses of rulers and governors ceased with him.
 Before their captivity and removal to Babylon, kings had ruled them, beginning with Saul,the nrSt king, and David;
 and before the kings, rulers called judges administered them and these began after Mosesand his suecessor, Joshua.
 After the return from Babylon a constitution οf olgarchic aristocracywas continuous( for the πραγμάτων), ἄχρι οὗ Πομπήιος Ῥωμαίων στρατηγὸς τὴν μὲν‘ Iερουσαλὴμ πολιορκεῖ κατὰ κράτος μιαίνει τε τὰ ἅγια μέχρι τῶν ἀδύτων τοῦ ἱεροῦ προελθών, τὸν δ’ ἐκ προγόνων διαδοχῆς εἰς ἐκεῖνο τοῦ καιροῦ διαρκέσαντα βααιλέα τε ὁμοῦ καὶ ἀρχιερέα, Αριστόβουλος ὄνομα ἦν αὐτῷ, δέσμιον ἐπὶ Ῥώμης ἅμα τέκνοις ἐκπέμψας, Ὑρκανῷ μὲν τῷ τούτου ἀδελφῶ τὴν ἀρχιερωσύνην παραδίδωσιν, τὸ δὲ πᾶν Ἰουδαίων ἔθνος ἐξ ἐκείνου Ρωμαίοις ὑπόφορον κατεστήσατο.
 αὐτίκα γοῦν καὶ Ὑρκανοῦ, εἰς ὃν ὕστατον τὰ τῆς τῶν ἀρχιερέων περιέστη διαδοχῆς, ὑπὸ Παρθῶν αἰχμαλώτου ληφθέντος, πρῶτος, ὡς γοῦν ἔφην, ἀλλόφυλος Ἡρῴδης ὑπὸ τῆς συγκλήτου Ῥωμαίων Αὐγούστου τε βασιλέως τὸ Ἰουδαίων ἔθνος ἐγχειρίζεται, καθ’ ὃν ἐναργῶς τῆς τοῦ Χριστοῦ παρουσίας ἐνστάσης, καὶ τῶν ἐθνῶν ἡ προσδοκωμένη σωτηρία τε καὶ κλῆσις ἀκολούθως τῆ προφητείᾳ παρηκολούθησεν·
 ἐξ οὗ δὴ χρόνου τῶν ἀπὸ Ἰούδα ἀρχόντων τε καἰ ἡγουμένων, λέγω δὲ τῶν ἐκ τοῦ Ἰουδαίων ἔθνους, διαλελοιπότων, εἰκότως αὐτοῖς καὶ τὰ τῆς ἐκ προγόνων εὐσταθῶς ἐπὶ τοὺς ἔγγιστα διαδόχους κατὰ γενεὰν προϊούσης ἀρχιερωσύνης παραχρῆμα συγχεῖται.
 ἔχεις καὶ τούτων ἀξιόχρεων τὸν Ἰώσηπον μάρτυρα, δηλοῦντα ὡς τὴν βασιλείαν παρὰ‘ Ρωμαίων ἐπιτραπεὶς Ἡρῴδης οὐκέτι τοὺς ἐξ ἀρχαίου γένους καθίστησιν ἀρχιερεῖς, ἀλλά τισιν ἀσήμοις τὴν τιμὴν ἀπένεμεν·
 τὰ ὅμοια δέ πρᾶξαι τῷ Ἡρῴδῃ περὶ τῆς καταστάσεως τῶν ἱερέων Ἀρχέλαόν τε τὸν παῖδα αὐτοῦ καὶ μετὰ τοῦτον Ῥωμαίους, τὴν ἀρχὴν τῶν Ἰουδαίων παρειληφότας.
 ὁ δ’ αὐτὸς δηλοῖ ὡς ἄρα καὶ τὴν priests were at the headοf affairs), until Pompey,a Roman general, attacked Jerusalem, besieged it in force, and demedthe holy placesby intruding intothe secret parts of the temple.
 Ηe sent to Rome asa prisoner with his children the king and high priest, Aristobulus by name,who had contunued the succession of his ancestors until then.
 To Hyrcanus, the brotherof Aristobulus,he handed over the high- priesthood,but made the whole nation οf the Jews from that time tributaryto the Romans.
 As soon as Hyrcanus, the last to whom belonged the high- priestly succession, was taken prisonerby the Parthians, Ηerοd,the Rrst foreigner, asIjust sriald,was entrurted with the nation of the Jews by the senateof the Romans and the Εmperοr Αugustus.
 The advent of Christ clearly came in his time, and thus the expected salvation and camng of the Gentiles followed consistently with the prophecy moreover, from the time when the rulers and govemors from Judah, that istosay those ofthe Jewish race, had ceased, immediate confusion naturally ensued in the affairs οf the priesthood which passed steaffidlly to the nearest heirs from generation to generation from the ancestors.
 Of this, too, you have Josephus asa valuable witness, for beexplains how Ηerod, when he was entrurted with thc kingdomby the Romans, no longer appointed tigh priests of the ancient race but assigned the honour to certain obscure persons;
 and that Ηerοd’s policy with regardtothe appointment ofthe priests was followed by his son Archelaus, and after himbythe Romans, when they took over the govemment the Jews.
 The same writer explains how Ηerοd ἱερὰν στολὴν τοῦ ἀρχιερέως·
 πρῶτος Ἡρῴδης ἀποκλείσας ὑπὸ ἰδίαν αφραγῖδα πεποίηται, μηκέτ’ αὐτὴν τοῖς ἀρχιερεῦσιν ἔχειν ὑφ’ ἑαυτοὺς ἐπιτρέφας·
 ταὐτὸν δὲ καὶ τὸν μετ’ αὐτὸν Ἀρχέλαον καὶ μετὰ τοῦτον Ῥωμαίους διαπράξασθαι.
 καὶ ταῦτα δ’ ἡμῖν εἰρήσθω εἰς ἑτέρας ἀπόδειξιν προφητείας κατὰ τὴν ἐπιφάνειαν τοῦ σωτῆρος ἡμῶν Ἰησοῦ χριστοῦ πεπερασμένης.
 σαφέστατα γοῦν ἐν τῷ Δανιὴλ ἑβδομάδων τινῶν ἀριθμὸν ὀνομαστὶ ἕως Χριστοῦ ἡγουμένου περιλαβὼν ὁ λόγος, περὶ ὧν ἐν ἑτέροις διειλήφαμεν, μετὰ τὸ τούτων συμπέρασμα ἐξολοθρευθήσεσθαι τὸ παρὰ Ἰουδαίοις χρῖσμα προφητεύει·
 καὶ τοῦτο δὲ σαφῶς κατὰ τὸν καιρὸν τῆς τοῦ σωτῆρος ἡμῶν Ἰησοῦ χριστοῦ γενέσεως ἀποδείκνυται συμπεπληρωμένον.
 ταῦτα δ’ ἡμῖν ἀναγκαίως εἰς παράστασιν τῆς τῶν χρόνων ἀληθείας προτετηρήσθω.
 VII.
 Ἐπειδὴ δὲ τὴν περὶ τοῦ Χριστοῦ γενεαλογίαν διαφόρως ἡμῖν ὅ τε Ματθαῖος καὶ ὁ Λουκᾶς εὐαγγελιζόμενοι παραδεδώκασι διαφωνεῖν τε νομίζονται τοῖς πολλοῖς τῶν τε πιστῶν ἕκαστος ἀγνοίᾳ τἀληθοῦς εὑρησιλογεῖν εἰς τοὺς τόπους πεφιλοτίμηται, φέρε, καὶ τὴν περὶ τούτων κατελθοῦσαν εἰς ἡμᾶς ἱστορίαν παραθώμεθα, ἢν δι’ ἐπιστολῆς Ἀριστείδῃ γράφων περὶ συμφωνίας τῆς ἐν τοῖς εὐαγγελίοις γενεαλογίας ὁ μικρῷ πρόσθεν ἡμῖν δηλωθεὶς Ἀφρικανὸς ἐμνημόνευσεν τὰς μὲν δὴ τῶν λοιπῶν δόξας ὡς ἂν βιαίους καὶ διεψευσμένας ἀπελέγξας, ἢνδ’ αὐτὸς παρείληφεν ἱστορίαν τούτοις αὐτοῖς ἐκτιθέμενος τοῖς ῥήμασιν·
 Επειδὴ γὰρ τὰ ὀνόματα τῶν γενῶν ἐν Ἰσραὴλ ἠριθμεῖτο ἢ φύσει ἢ νόμῳ, φύσει μέν, γνησίου was the nrsttolock up and keep under his own seal the sacred robe οfthehigh Ρriest, for heno longer allowed the high priests to keep it in theirown charge,and his successor, Archelaus, and afterhim the Romans, pursued the same policy.
 These facts may also serve us as proof of the rulmment οf anothcr prophecy onthe manifestation of our Sariour Jesus Christ.
 It is quite obrious that in Daniel the text dennes the number of certain weeks, which 1 have treated of elsewhere, in so many words as“ until Christ the” and prophesies that after the accomplishment of these weeks the anointing among the Jews shall be destroyed.
 The fulmment of this at the timeof the birth of our saviour Jesus Christ is clearly demonstrated.
 These points must suffice as preliminary observations necessaryto establish the truth ofthe date.
 VII.
 since Marthew and Luke, having given us different traditions in their gospels concerning the genealogy οf Christ, are eonsidered by many to disargee;
;
 and since each of the faithfulin ignoranee of the truthhas been Ζealousin making guessesonthese passages, come, let us set out the story that has reached us concerning them, whieh the Africanus mentioned by uSa short timeago narrated inaletter which he wrpte to Aristides on the harmony of the genealogies in the Gospels, confuting the opinions of others as forced and fictitious and setting out his own traditions in the following words:
“ Since the namesofthe families in Israel were numbered either by nature or by law;
 σπέρματος διαδοχὴ, νόμῳ δέ, ἑτέρου παιδοπιουμένου εἰς ὄνομα τελευτήσαντος ἀδελφοῦ ἀτέκνου( ὅτι γὰρ οὐδέπω δέδοτο ἐλπὶς ἀναστάσεως σαφής, τὴν μέλλουσαν ἐπαγγελίαν ἀναστάσει ἐμιμοῦντο θνητῇ, ἵνα ἀνέκλειπτον τὸ ὄνομα μείνῃ τοῦ μετηλλαχότος).
 ηλλαχότος)·
 ἐπεὶ οὗν οἱ τῇ γενεαλογίᾳ ταύτῃ ἐμφερόμενοι, οἱ μὲν διεδέξαντο παῖς πατέρα γνησίως, οἱ δὲ ἑτέροις μὲν ἐγεννήθησαν, ἑτέροις δὲ προσετέθησαν κλήσει, ἀμφοτέρων γέγονεν ἢ μνήμη, καὶ τῶν γεγεννηκότων καὶ τῶν ὡς γεγεννηκότων.
 οὕτως οὐδέτερον τῶν εὐαγγελίων φεύδεται, καὶ φύσιν ἀριθμοῦν καὶ νόμον.
 ἐπεπλάκη γὰρ ἀλλήλοις τὰ γένη, τό τε ἀπὸ τοῦ Σολομῶνος καὶ τὸ ἀπὸ τοῦ Ναθάν, ἀναστάσεσιν ἀτέκνων καὶ δευτερογαμίαις καὶ ἀναστάσει σπερμάτων, ὡς δικαίως τοὺς αὐτοὺς ἄλλοτε ἄλλων νομίζεσθαι, τῶν μὲν δοκούντων πατέρων, τῶν δὲ ὑπαρχόντων·
 ὡς ἀμφοτέρας τὰς διηγήσεις κυρίως ἀληθεῖς οὔσας ἐπὶ τὸν Ἰωσὴφ πολυπλόκως μέν, ἀλλ’ ἀκριβῶς κατελθεῖν.
 ἵνα δὲ σαφὲς ἦ τὸ λεγόμενον, μένον, τὴν ἐναλλαγὴν τῶν γενῶν διηγήσομαι.
 ἀπὸ τοῦ Δαυὶδ διὰ Σολομῶνος τὰς γενεὰς καταρι- by nature, in the successionof legitimate birth;
 by law, when a man begat children in the name ofa brother who had died childless;
 for because no certain hope of resurrection had as yet been given they portrayed the future promise bya mortal resurrection, in order that the nameof him whohad passed away might not fail to remain.
 since them by following this kind Of genealogy some succeeded in the legitimate order of fatherand son,but others Were reckoned in name to one father though the childrenof another,the memory ofboth was retained, both of the actual and of the fictitious parents.
 Thus neither of the Gospels misstates, reckonig both nature and law.
 For the two families, the one descended from Solomon and tlle other from Νathan, Were connected with each other by the‘ resurrections’1 of the childlessand second marriagesandthe rairing up of seed, so that the same persons eould be correetly regardedasthe children of different persons at different times, either of their fictitious or of their real fathers.
 Thus both accounts are strictly true in coming down to Joseph ina manner complicated but accurate.
 In οrder that What has been said may be clearI will explain the relation of the families.
 2 Reckoning the generations from David through Solomon the third from θμουμένοις τρίτος ἀπὸ τέΛους·
 εὑρίσκεται Ματθάν, ὃς ἐγέννησε τὸν Ἰακώβ, τοῦ Ἰωσὴφ τὸν πατέρα·
 ἀπὸ δὲ Ναθὰν τοῦ Δαυὶδ κατὰ Λουκᾶν ὁμοίως τρίτος ἀπὸ τέλους Μελχί·
 Ἰωσὴφ γὰρ υἱὸς Ἥλι’ τοῦ Μελχί.
 σκοποῦ τοίνυν ἡμῖν κειμένου τοῦ Ἰωσήφ, ἀποδεικτέον πῶς ἑκάτερος αὐτοῦ πατὴρ ἱστορεῖται, ὅ τε Ἰακὼβ ὁ ἀπὸ Σολομῶνος καὶ Ἡλὶ ὁ ἀπὸ τοῦ Ναθὰν ἑκάτερος κατάγοντες γένος, ὅπως τε πρότερον οὗτοι δή, ὅ τε Ἰακὼβ καὶ ὁ Ἠλί, δύο ἀδελφοί, καὶ πρό γε, πῶς οἱ τούτων πατέρες, Ματθὰν καὶ Μελχί, διαφόρων ὄντες γενῶν, τοῦ Ἰωαὴφ ἀναφαίνονται πάπποι.
 καὶ δὴ οὖν ὅ τε Ματθὰν καὶ ὁ Μελχί, ἐν μέρει τὴν αὐτὴν ἀγαγόμενοι γυναῖκα, ὁμομητρίους ἀδελφοὺς ἐπαιδοποιήσαντο, τοῦ νόμου μὴ κωλύοντος χηρεύουσαν, ἤτοι ἀπολελυμένην ἢ καὶ τελευτήσαντος τοῦ ἀνδρός, ἄλλῳ γαμεῖαθαι·
 ἐκ δὴ τῆς’ Eαθὰ( τοῦτο γὰρ καλεῖσθαι τὴν γυναῖκα παραδέδοται) πρῶτος Ματθάν, ὁ ἀπὸ τοῦ Σολομῶνος τὸ γένος κατάγων, τὸν Ἰακὼβ γεννᾷ, καὶ τελευτήσαντος τοῦ Ματθὰν Μελχί, ὁ ἐπὶ τὸν Ναθὰν κατὰ γένος ἀναφερόμενος, χηρεύουσαν, ἐκ μὲν τῆς αὐτῆς φυλῆς, ἐξ ἄλλου δὲ γένους ὤν, ὡς προεῖπον, ἀγαγόμενος αὐτήν, ἔσχεν υἱὸν τὸν Ἡλί.
 οὕτω δὴ διαφόρων δύο γενῶν εὑρήσομεν τόν τε Ἰακὼβ καὶ τὸν Ἡλὶὁμομητρίους ἀδελφούς, ὧν ὁ ἕτερος, Ἰακώβ, ἀτέκνου τοῦ ἀδελφοῦ τελευτήσαντος Ἡλί, τὴν γυναῖκα παραλαβών, ἐγέννησεν ἐξ αὐτῆς τρίτον τὸν Ἰωσήφ, κατὰ φύαιν μὲν ἑαυτῷ( καὶ κατὰ λόγον, δι’ ὃ γέγραπται ἴ’ Ἰακὼβ δὲ ἐγέννησεν τὸν Ἰωαήφ’), κατὰ νόμον δὲ τοῦ Ἡλὶ υἱὸς ἦν·
 ἐκείνῳ γὰρ ὁ Ἰακώβ, ἀδελφὸς ὤν, ἀνέστησεν the end iS found to be Matthan who begat Jacob the father of Joseph;
 but from Νathan, the son οf David, according to Luke, the corresponding from the end is Melchi;
 for Joseph as a son or Εli the son of Melchi.
 So then fixing our attention on Joseph, it mustbe demonstrated how each iscalledhiS father, Jaeob traeing his family from Solomon and Elifrom Nathan,andhow first they, that isJaeoband Eh,were tWo brothers, and, still earlier,how their fathers, Matthan and Melchi, belonging to different families, are representedas the grandfathers or Joseph.
 Now Mathan and Melchi, inasmuch as they took the same wife, were the fatherS of step- brothers, for the law doeS not preventa woman whohas lost her husband either by her own divorce orby his death from being married to another.
 Now from Estha, ror thisis the traditional nameof the Woman, first Mattan, who reekoned his deseent from solomon, begat Jaeob and when Μatthan was dead, Melchi, who traced himself by family to Νathan, took his widow, for he was of the same tribe though of another family, asIsaid before,and hada son, Eli.
 Thus We shall find that though the two families were different Jaeob and Eli were step- brothers of the same mother, and the Brst of them, Jacob, when his brother Eli died without children, took his wife, and begat of her the third,1 Joseph, according to nature, for himself( and so alsoaccordingto reason,for which causeitis written,‘ And Jacob begat Joseph’), but accordingtolaw he wastheson of Eli,forto him Jacob,being his brother, raised up σπέρμα.
 δι’ ὅπερ οὐκ ἀκυρωθήσεται καὶ ἢ κατ’ αὐτὸν γενεαλογία·
 ἢν Ματθαῖος μὲν ὁ εὐαγγελιστὴςΙ ἐξαριθμούμενος Ἰακὼβ δέ’ φησίν ἐγέννησεν τὸν Ἰωσήφ,’ ὁ δὲ Λουκᾶς ἀνάπαλιν‘ ὃς ἢν, ὡς ἐνομίζετο καὶ γὰρ καὶ τοῦτο προστίθησιν) τοῦ Ιωαὴφ τοῦ Ἠλὶ τοῦ Μελχί. ’
 τὴν γὰρ κατὰ νόμον γένεσιν ἐπισημότερον οὐκ ἢν ἐξειπεῖν, καὶ τὸ ἐγέννησεν’ ἐπὶ τῆς τοιᾶσδε παιδοποιίας ἄχρι τέλους ἐσιώπησεν, τὴν ἀναφορὰν ποιησάμενος ἕως τοῦ Ἀδὰμ τοῦ θεοῦ’ κατ’ ἀνάλυσιν.
 οὐδὲ μὴν ἀναπόδεικτον ἢ ἐσχεδιασμένον ἐστὶν τοῦτο.
 τοῦ γοῦν σωτῆρος οἱ κατὰ σάρκα συγγενεῖς, εἴτ’ οὖν φανητιῶντες εἴθ’ ἁπλῶς ἐκδιδάσκοντες, πάντως δὲ ἀληθεύοντες, παρέδοσαν καὶ ταῦτα·
 ὡς Ἰδουμαῖοι λῃσταὶ Ἀσκάλωνι πόλει τῆς Παλαιστίνης ἐπελθόντες, ἐξ εἰδωλείου’ Ἀπόλλωνος,δ’ πρὸς τοῖς τείχεσιν ἵδρυτο, Ἀντίπατρον Ἡρῴδου τινὸς ἱεροδούλου παῖδα πρὸς τοῖς ἄλλοις ἀύλοις αἰχμάλωτον ἀπῆγον, τῷ δὲ λύτρα ὑπὲρ τοῦ υἱοῦ καταθέσθαι μὴ δύνασθαι τὸν ἱερέα ὁ’ Ἀντίπατρος τοῖς τῶν Ἰδουμαίων ἔθεσιν ἐντραφείς, ὕστερον Ὑρκανῷ φιλοῦται τῷ τῆς Ἰουδαίας ἀρχιερεῖ·
 πρεσβεύσας δὲ πρὸς Πομπήιον ὑπὲρ τοῦ Ὑρκανοῦ καὶ τὴν βασιλείαν ἐΛευθερώσας αὐτῷ ὑπὸ Ἀριστοβούλου τοῦ ἀδελφοῦ περικοπτομένην, αὐτὸς ηὐτύχησεν, ἐπιμελητὴς τῆς Παλαιστίνης χρηματίσας·
 διαδέχεται δὲ τὸν Ἀντίπατρον, φθόνῳ τῆς πολλῆς εὐτυχίας δολοφονηθέντα, υἱὸς Ἡρῴδης, ὃς ὕστερον ὑπ’ Ἀντωνίου καὶ τοῦ σεβαστοῦ συγκλήτου δόγματι τῶν Ἰουδαίων ἐκρίθη βασίλευε ἱν·
 ὁδ’ παῖδες Ἡρῴδης οἵτ’ ἄλλοι τετράρχαι.
 ταῦτα seed.
 Wherefore the genealogy concerning him will not be inaccurate.
 Matthew, the evangelist, reckoned it in this way, saying,‘ Αnd Jacob begat’but Luke, on theotherhand, said,‘ Who waS, aS it was supposed’( for he addSthis‘ the sonof Joseph,the son of Eli, the sonof Melchi,’ for if was impossibleto eXpress legaldescent more pointedly, and up to the endhe suppressed the word‘ begat’concerning suehraisingof children, for he traces the list back to its Source with Αdam the Son of God.’
 This is neither deVoidof nor isitconjecture, for the human relatives of the Saviour have handedon this tradition, either fromfamily pride, or merelyto give information, but in any case speaking the truth.
 When Idumaean brigands attacked the city of Ascalon in Palestine among their other spoils they took away captive from the templeof Αpollo, which Was built on the walls, Antipater the child ofa certain Herod,a hierodoulos,and since the priest was unable to pay ransom for his son, Antipater was brought up in the customs of the Idumaeans and later was befriended friended by Hyrcanus the high priestof Judaea.
 When sent ona mission to Ρompey on behalf of Hyrcanus he Won for him the freedom of the kingdom which had been taken away by his brother Aristobulus, and so was himself fortunate enough to gain the title of overseer of Palestine.
 Antipater was assassinated from envy of his great good fortune, and succeeded byason Ηerod,1 who laterwas appointed by Antonyand by decreeof the august senatetobe king oftheJews.
 His children were Ηerod 2 and the other tetrarchs.
 So much is shared μὲν δὴ κοινὰ καὶ ταῖς Ἐλλήνων ἱστορίαις·
 ἀναγράπτων δὲ εἰς τότε ἐν τοῖς ἀρχείοις ὄντων τῶν Ἑβραϊκῶν γενῶν καὶ τῶν ἄχρι προσηλύτων ἀναφερομένων, ὡς Ἀχιὼρ τοῦ Ἀμμανίτου καὶ Ροὺθ τῆς Μωαβίτιδος, τῶν τε ἀπ’ Αἰγύπτου συμβαλλομένου ἐπιμίκτων, ὁ Ἡρῴδης, οὐδέν τι συμβαλλομένου τοῦ τῶν Ἰσραηλιτῶν γένους αὐτῷ καὶ τῷ συνειδότι τῆς δυσγενείας κρουόμενος, ἐνέπρησεν αὐτῶν τὰς ἀναγραφὰς τῶν γενῶν, οἰόμενος εὐγενὴς ἀναφανεῖσθαι τῷ μηδ’ ἄλλον ἔχειν ἐκ δημοσίου συγγραφῆς τὸ γένος ἀνάγειν ἐπὶ τοὺς πατριάρχας ἢ προσηλύτους τούς τε καλουμένους γειώρας, τοὺς ἐπιμίκτους.
 ὀλίγοι δὴ τῶν ἐπιμελῶν, ἰδιωτικὰς ἑαυτοῖς ἀπογραφὰς ἢ μνημονεύσαντες τῶν ὀνομάτων ἢ ἄλλως ἔχοντες ἐξ ἀντιγράφων, ἐναβρύνονται σῳζομένη τῆ μνήμη τῆς εὐγενείας·
 ὧν ἐτύγχανον οἱ προειρημένοι, δεσπόσυνοι καλούμενοι διὰ τὴν πρὸς τὸ σωτήριον γένος συνάφειαν ἀπό τε Ναζάρων καὶ Κωχαβα κωμῶν Ἰουδαϊκῶν τῆ λοιπῇ γῇ ἐπιφοιτήσαντες καὶ τὴν προκειμένην γενεαλογίαν ἔκ τε τῆς βίβλου τῶν ἡμερῶν, ἐς ὅσον ἐξικνοῦντο, ἐξηγησάμενοι.
 εἴτ’ οὗν οὕτωςεἴτ’ ἄλλως ἔχοι, σαφεστέραν ἐξήγησιν οὐκ ἂν ἔχοι τις ἄλλος ἐξευρεῖν, ὡς ἔγωγε νομίζω πᾶς τε ὃς εὐγνώμων τυγχάνει, καὶ ἡμῖν αὕτη μελέτω, εἰ καὶ ἀμάρτυρός ἐστιν, τῷ μὴ κρείττονα ἢ ἀληθεστέραν ἔχειν εἰπεῖν·
 τό γέ τοι εὐαγγέλιον πάντως ἀληθεύει.
 καὶ ἐπὶ τέλει δὲ τῆς αὐτῆς ἐπιστολῆς προστίθησι ταῦτα.
 “ Ματθὰν ὁ ἀπὸ Σολομῶνος ἐγέννησε τὸν with the histories οf the Greeks also.
 But somce the Hebrew families and those traceableto proselytes,such as Achior the Ammonite and Ruththe Moabitess,and the mixed families which had come outof Egypt,had until then been enrolled in the archives, herod, beeause the family οf the Israelites contriuted nothing to him, and because he was goaded by his own eouseiousness of his base birth, burned the records of their families, thinking to appear hoble if nooneelse was able by publicdocuments to traeehisfamily to thepatriarchs οr proselytes, οr to the so- called gers 1 of mixed descent.
 Now a fewwho were careful, having privaterecords for themselves, either remembering the names or otherwise deriving them from copies, gloried inthe preservation of the memory of their good birth;
 among these werethose mentioned above, called desposyni, beeause οf their relation to the family of the Saviour, 2 and fromthe Jewish villages of Nazareth and Cochaba they traversed the rest of the land and expounded the Preceding genealogy οf their deseent, and from the book of Chronicles so far as they went.
 3 whether this be so οr not no one could givea clearer account, in my opinionandin that ofall well- disposed persons, and it may suffice us even though it is not corroborated, since we have nothing berter or truer to say:
 in any casethe gospel speaks the’’Αnd at theendof the same letterΑfricanus adds this:
 Matthan of the line of Solomon begat Jacob.
 4 On Ἰακώβ.
 Ματθὰν ἀποθανόντος, Μελχὶ ὁ ἀπὸ αθὰν ἐκ τῆς αὐτῆς γυναικὸς ἐγέννησε τὸν Ἡλί.
 ὁμομήτριοι ἄρα ἀδελφοὶ Ἡλὶ καὶ Ἰακώβ.
 Ἠλὶ ἀτέκνου ἀποθανόντος ὁ Ἰακὼβ ἀνέστησεν αὐτῷ σπέρμα, γεννήσας τὸν Ἰωαήφ, κατὰ φύσιν μὲν ἑαυτῷ, κατὰ νόμον δὲ τῷ Ἡλί.
 οὕτως ἀμφότέρων ἦν υἱὸς ὁ Ἰωαήφ.
 ” Τοσαῦτα ὁ Ἀφρικανός.
 καὶ δὴ τοῦ’ Iωαὴφ ὧδέ πως γενεαλογουμένου, δυνάμει καὶ ἡ Μαρία αὺν αὐτῷ πέφηνεν ἐκ τῆς αὐτῆς οὖσα φυλῆς, εἴ γε κατὰ τὸν Μωυσέως νόμον οὐκ ἐξῆν ἑτέραις ἐπιμίγνυσθαι φυλαῖς·
 ἑνὶ γὰρ τῶν ἐκ τοῦ αὐτοῦ δήμου καὶ πατριᾶς τῆς αὐτῆς ζεύγνυσθαι πρὸς γάμον παρακελεύεται, ὡς ἂν μὴ περιστρέφοιτο τοῦ γένους ὁ κλῆρος ἀπὸ φυλῆς ἐπὶ φυλήν.
 ὡδὶ μὲν οὖν καὶ ταῦτα ἐχέτω.
 VIII.
 Ἀλλὰ γὰρ τοῦ χριστοῦ γεννηθέντος ταῖς προφητείαις ἀκολούθως ἐν Βηθλεὲμ τῆς Ἰουδαίας κατὰ τοὺς δεδηλωμένους χρόνους, Ἡρῴδης ἐπὶ τῇ τῶν ἐξ ἀνατολῆς μάγων ἀνερωτήσει ὅπῃ εἴη διαπυνθανομένων ὁ τεχθεὶς βασιλεὺς τῶν Ἰουδαίων, ἑορακέναι γὰρ αὐτοῦ τὸν ἀστέρα καὶ τῆς τοσῆσδε πορείας τοῦτ’ αἴτιον αὐτοῖς γεγονέναι, οἷα θεῷ προσκυνῆσαι τῷ τεχθέντι διὰ σπουδῆς πεποιημένοις, οὐ σμικρῶς ἐπὶ τῷ πράγματι, ἅτε κινδυνευούσης, ὥς γε δὴ ᾤετο, αὐτῷ τῆς ἀρχῆς, διακινηθείς, πυθόμενος τῶν παρὰ τῷ ἔθνει νομοδιδασκάλων ποῦ τὸν Χριστὸν γεννηθήσεσθαι προσδοκῷεν, ὡς ἔγνω τὴν Μιχαίου προφητείαν ἐν Βηθλεὲμ προαναφωνοῦσαν, ἑνὶ προστάγματι τοὺς ὑπομαζίους ἔν τε τῆ Βηθλεὲμ καὶ πᾶσι τοῖς ὁρίοις αὐτῆς ἀπὸ διετοῦς καὶ κατωτέρω παῖδας, κατὰ the deathof Μatthan, Melchi ofthe line of Νathan begat Eli from the same woman.
 Thus Eli and Jacob vere step- brothers with the same mother.
 When Eli died without children, Jacob raised upseedfor him, begetting Joseph as his oWn natural son but rile legal Son of Eli.
 Thus Joseph was son of both.
” far Africanus.
 Νow Since this was the nature of thegenealogyof Joseph, it is potential proof that Μary belonged to the Same tribe as he, seeing that according to the lawof Moses, it was not lawful for the different tribes to mix, for the command is given to join in marriage with one of the same people and same family, in order that the inheritance of the raee might not be ehanged from tribe to tribe.
 Thus let this suffice on this point.
 VIII.
 Νow when Christ was born, in accordanee with the prophecy, at Bethlehem of Judaea atthetime mentioned, Ηerod was asked by the Μagi from the East where might he be whoμ’ born kingofthe jews, for they had seen his star, and thishad been the eauseof their long journey in their zeal to worship the infant as God.
 The request caused him to be nota lttle disturbed atthe situation for,as he thought, his sovereignty was in danger.
 Ηe therefore inquired from the teaehersofthe Law among the people where they expeeted the Christtobe born, and when he learnt the propheey of Micah, foretelling thatit shouldbein Bethlehem,he gavea comprehensive orderto put to death all the infants which were being nursed in Bethlehem and the whole neighbourhood, of two years old and less, aeeording to the time indicated τὸν ἀπηκριβωμένον αὐτῷ χρόνον παρὰ τῶν μάγων, ἀναιρεθῆναι προστάττει, πάντως που καὶ τὸν Ἰησοῦν, ὥς γε ἢν εἰκός, τῆς αὐτῆς τοῖς ὁμήλιξι συναπολαῦσαι συμφορᾶς οἰόμενος.
 φθάνει γε μὴν τὴν ἐπιβουλὴν εἰς Αἴγυπτον διακομισθεὶς ὁ παῖς, δι’ ἐπιφανείας ἀγγέλου τὸ μέλλον προμεμαθηκότων αὐτοῦ τῶν γονέων.
 ταῦτα μὲν οὖν καὶ ἢ ἱερὰ τοῦ εὐαγγελίου διδάσκει γραφή·
 ἄξιον δ’ ἐπὶ τούτοις συνιδεῖν τἀπίχειρα τῆς Ἡρῴδου κατὰ τοῦ χριστοῦ καὶ τῶν ὁμηλίκων αὐτῷ τόλμης, ὡς παραυτίκα, μηδὲ σμικρᾶς ἀναβολῆς γεγενημένης, ἡ θεία δίκη περιόντα ἔτ’ αὐτὸν τῷ βίῳ μετελήλυθεν, τὰ τῶν μετὰ τὴν ἐνθένδε ἀπαλλαγὴν διαδεξομένων αὐτὸν ἐπιδεικνῦσα προοίμια.
 ὡς μὲν οὖν τὰς κατὰ τὴν βασιλείαν αὐτῷ νομισθείσας εὐπραγίας ταῖς κατὰ τὸν οἶκον ἐπαλλήλοις ἠμαύρωσεν συμφοραῖς, γυναικὸς καὶ τέκνων καὶ τῶν λοιπῶν τῶν μάλιστα πρὸς γένους ἀναγκαιοτάτων τε καὶ φιλτάτων μιαιφονίαις, οὐδὲ οἷόν τε νῦν καταλέγειν, τραγικὴν ἅπασαν δραματουργίαν ἐπισκιαζούσης τῆς περὶ τούτων ὑποθέσεως, ἢν εἰς πλάτος ἐν ταῖς κατ’ αὐτὸν ἱστορίαις ὁ Ἰώσηπος διελήλυθεν·
 ὡς δ’ ἅμα τῇ κατὰ τοῦ σωτῆρος ἡμῶν καὶ τῶν ἄλλων νηπίων ἐπιβουλῇ θεήλατος αὐτὸν καταλαβοῦσα μάστιξ εἰς θάνατον συνήλασεν, οὐ χεῖρον καὶ τῶν φωνῶν τοῦ συγγραφέως ἐπακοῦσαι, κατὰ λέξιν ἐν ἑπτακαιδεκάτῳ τῆς Ἰουδαϊκῆς’ Ἀρχαιολογίας τὴν καταστροφὴν τοῦ κατ’ αὐτὸν βίου τοῦτον γράφοντος τὸν τρόπον·
“ Ἡρῴδῃ δὲ μειζόνως ἢ νόσος ἐνεπικραίνετο, 168- 170 δίκην ὧν παρηνόμησεν ἐκπρασομένου τοῦ θεοῦ.
 πῦρ μὲν γὰρ μαλακὸν ἦν, οὐχ ὧδε πολλὴν ἀποσημαῖνον τοῖς ἐπαφωμένοις τὴν φλόγωσιν, ὅσην to him by the Magl;
 supposing, as was natural, that Jesus also would enjoy the same fate as the children οf his age.
 Ηowever the child forestalled the plot hy being taken to Εgypt, as by the manifestation of an angel his parents had learned beforehand what wasto happen.
 This is also taught by the sacred scriptureof the Gospel, but itis worth noticing in this connexion the result of the crime of Ηerod against the Christ and the children of his age;
 for immediately, without evena short delay, the justice of God overtook him while he was still in life, showingthepreludeof what awaitedhimwhen he had passed hence.
 It is not now possible even to givea summary list of the ways by which he darkened what were reckoned the glories οf his reign, by the successive misfortunes of his house, by the foul murder οf wife and children and of the rest who were closest to him in family and in affection;
 for the shadows in their story, whieh Josephus haS narrated at length in the historyof Ηerod, are darker than any in tragic drama.
 But it is well to hear from the words of that writer how, from the moment of the plot against our saviour and the other innocents,a scourge sent from God seized him and drove him to death.
 Ιn the seventeenth book of the Jeruish Antiquities he writers of the catastrophe of Herod's life in this way:
“ But in Ηerod disease kept growing ever more cruel as God exacted punishment for his crimes.
 For there wasa slow hre which ffid not give much indication to those who touched him οf the τοῖς ἐντὸς προσετίθει τὴν κάκωσιν, ἐπιθυμία δὲ δεινὴ τοῦ δέξασθαί τι, οὐδὲ ἦν μὴ οὐχ ὑπουργεῖν, καὶ ἕλκωσις τῶν τε ἐντέρων καὶ μάλιστα τοῦ κόλου δειναὶ ἀλγηδόνες καὶ φλέγμα ὑγρὸν περὶ τοὺς πόδας καὶ διαυγές·
 παραπλησία δὲ καὶ περὶ τὸ ἦτρον κάκωσις ἢν, ναὶ μὴν καὶ τοῦ αἰδοίου αῆφις, σκώληκας ἐμποιοῦσα, πνεύματός τε ὀρθία ἔντασις, καὶ αὐτὴ λίαν ἀηδὴς ἀχθηδόνι τε τῆς ἀποφορᾶς καὶ τῷ πυκνῷ τοῦ ἄσθματος, ἐσπασμένος τε περὶ πᾶν ἢν μέρος, ἰσχὺν οὐχ ὑπομενητὴν προστιθέμενος.
 ἐλέγετο γοῦν ὑπὸ τῶν θειαζόντων καὶ οἷς ταῦτα προαποφθέγγεσθαι σοφία πρόκειται, ποινὴν τοῦ πολλοῦ καὶ δυσσεβοῦς ταύτην ὁ θεὸς εἰσπράττεσθαι παρὰ τοῦ βασιλέως.
 ” Ταῦτα μὲν ἐν τῆ δηΛωθείσῃ γραφῆ παρασημαίνεται ὁ προειρημένος·
 καὶ ἐν τῆ δευτέρᾳ δὲ τῶν Ἱστοριῶν τὰ παραπλήσια περὶ τοῦ αὐτοῦ παραδίδωσιν, ὧδέ πως γράφων·
 “ Ἔνθεν αὐτοῦ τὸ σῶμα πᾶν ἡ νόσος διαλαβοῦσα ποικίλοις πάθεσιν ἐμέριζεν.
 πυρετὸς μὲν γὰρ ἦν χλιαρός, κνησμὸςδ’ ἀφόρητος τῆς ἐπιφανείας ὅλης καὶ κόλου αυνεχεῖς ἀλγηδόνες περί τε τοὺς πόδας ὡς ὑδρωπιῶντος οἰδήματα τοῦ τε ἤτρου φλεγμονὴ καὶ δι’ αἰδοίου σηπεδὼν σκώληκα γεννῶσα, πρὸς τούτοις ὀρθόπνοια καὶ δύσπνοια καὶ σπασμοὶ πάντων τῶν μελῶν, ὥστε τοὺς ἐπιθειάζοντας ποινὴν εἷναι τὰ νοσήματα λέγειν.
 ὁ δὲ παλαίων τοσούτοις πάθεσιν ὅμως τοῦ ξῆν ἀντείχετο, σωτηρίαν τε ἤλπιζεν, καὶ θεραπείας ἐπενόει.
 διαβὰς γοῦν τὸν Ἰορδάνην τοῖς κατὰ ΚαΛΛιρόην θερμοῖς ἐχρῆτο·
 ταῦτα δὲ ἔξεισιν μὲν εἰς τὴν Ἀσφαλτῖτιν λίμνην, ὑπὸ γλυκύτητος burning which within was increasing his evil plight, and an awful desire for nourishment, which could not be ministered to, and ulceration of the intestines, and especially awful pain in the colon, and a moist and transparent dropsy in his feet;
 similar too was an inflammation of the bladder, and evenmortificationof the genitals breeffing worms.
 There was alsoa shrill accelerationof his breathing, and this was very offensive from the nature of the discharge and rapidity of hisbreath.
 Ηe was convulsedin every part with intolerable severity.
 1 Thus it was said by those who looked on, and had the wisdom to pronounce οn these things, that Godwas exacting this penalty from the king for his many impieties.
” The writer mentioned above gives this account in the treatise quotedI and in the seeond book of the Jeruish Wars he givesa similar traffition, writing as follows:
“ Then the ffisease spread through his Whole body, and attacked each part with divers sufferings.
 The fever rose, there was intolerable itching of the whole surtace, incessant pain in the colon, his feet were swollen as though with dropsy, there was inflammation of the bladder, and gangreneof the genitals, breeffing worms.
 In addition to this, hiS breathing was ffiffieult and impossible ifhe lay down, and there Were spasmsin every limb, so thatthedivines said thathis illness wasa punishment.
 Yet though he was struggling with such great suffering he still elung to life hoping for health and thinkingof cure.
 So he crossed the Jordan and took the warm baths atë which flow out into the Dead δέ ἐστι καὶ πότιμα.
 δόξαν ἐνταῦθα τοῖς ἰατροῖς ἐλαίῳ θερμῷ πᾶν ἀναθάλφαι τὸ σῶμα χαλασθὲν εἰς ἐλαίου πλήρη πύελον, ἐκλύει καὶ τοὺς ὀφθαλμοὺς ὡς ἐκλυθεὶς ἀνέστρεφεν.
 θορύβου δὲ τῶν θεραπόντων γενομένου, πρὸς μὲν τὴν πληγὴν ἀνήνεγκεν, εἰς δὲ τὸ λοιπὸν ἀπογνοὺς τὴν σωτηρίαν, τοῖς τε στρατιώταις ἀνὰ δραχμὰς πεντήκοντα ἐκέλευσεν διανεῖμαι καὶ πολλὰ χρήματα τοῖς ἡγεμόσι καὶ τοῖς φίλοις.
 αὐτὸς δ’ ὑποστρέφων εἰς ἹεριχοῦνταΙ παραγίνεται, μελαγχολῶν ἤδη καὶ μόνον οὐκ ἀπειλῶν αὐτῷ τι τῷ θανάτῳ·
 προέκοφεν δ’ εἰς ἐπιβουλὴν ἀθεμίτου πράξεως.
 τοὺς γὰρ ἀφ’ ἑκάστης κώμης ἐπισήμους ἄνδρας ἐξ ὅλης Ἰουδαίας συναγαγὼν εἰς τὸν καλούμενον ἱππόδρομον ἐκέλευσεν συγκλεῖσαι, προσκαλεσάμενος δὲ Σαλώμην τὴν ἀδελφὴν καὶ τὸν ἄνδρα ταύτης Ἀλεξᾶν οἶδα’ ἔφη‘ Ἰουδαίους τὸν ἐμὸν ἑορτάσοντας θάνατον, δύναμαι δὲ πενθεῖσθαι δι’ ἑτέρων καὶ λαμπρὸν ἐπιτάφιον σχεῖν, ἂν ὑμεῖς θελήσητε ταῖς ἐμαῖς ἐντολαῖς ὑπουργῆσαν.
 τούσδε τοὺς φρουρουμένους ἄνδρας, ἐπειδὰν ἐκπνεύσω, τάχιστα κτείνατε περιστήσαντες τοὺς στρατιώτας, ἵνα πᾶσα Ἰουδαία καὶ πᾶς οἶκος καὶ ἄκων ἐπ’ ἐμοὶ δακρύσῃ.’
 ’’ καὶ μετὰ βραχέα φησίν“ αὖθις δέ, καὶ γὰρ ἐνδείᾳ τροφῆς καὶ βηχὶ σπασμώδει διετείνετο, τῶν ἀλγηδόνων ἡσθεὶς φθάσαι τὴν εἱμαρμένην ἐπεβάλλετο·
 λαβὼν δὲ μῆλον, ᾔτησε καὶ μαχαίριον·
 εἰώθει γὰρ ἀποτέμνων ἐσθίειν·
 ἔπειτα περιαθρήσας μή τις ὁ κωλύσων αὐτὸν εἴη, ἐπῆρεν τὴν δεξιὰν ὡς πλήξων ἑαυτόν. ’
’ A.
 I.
 ἐπὶ ἐπὶ δὲ τούτοις ὁ αὐτὸς ἱστορεῖ συγγραφεὺς ἕτερον αὐτοῦ γνήσιον παῖδα πρὸ τῆς ἐσχάτης Sea but are sweet and drinkable.
 There it was dccided by his physicians to warm up his whole body with hot oil by letting it down intoa tub full of oil, but he eollapsed and turned up his eyes as though dying.
 Disturbauce arose among the attendants and he eame back to his sufferings, but for the future gave up hope of cure and οrdered Rfty drachmas each to be distributed to the soldiers and much money to the govemors and his friends.
 Ηe then retumedand reached Jerieho, full of melancholy and seareely refraining from the threat οf suicide.
 nut he gained strength enough to plan one more execrable crime;
 for he brought together the notables from every village from all Judaea and commanded them to be shut up in the so- called Hippordrome.
 He then summonedsalome, Salome, his siter,and her husband, Αlexas,and said,‘Ι know thattheJews celebrate celebratemydeath with festivity, butIcan be mournedby others and havea splendid funeralif you are willingto administer my commands.
 Station solffiers around these men whoare shut up, and as soon asI expire kill them with all speed, that all Judaeaand every house may weep over me even against its will. ’
’’ Αftera little Josephus says:
“ Later on, racked by lack of food anda convulsive cough, the pains he felt urged him to anticipate fate.
 Ηe took an apple and asked for a knife, for it was his custom to peel itand eat it.
 nen, having turned round, leSt there should be anyto prevent him, he raisedhis right hand aS ifhe were going to stab” Moreover, the same historian relates that he ordered the murder οf another legitimate son before the end of his life, τοῦ βίου τελευτῆς, τρίτον ἐπὶ δυσὶν ἤδη προανῃρημένοις, δι’ ἐπιτάξεως ἀνελόντα, παραχρῆμα τὴν ζωὴν οὐ μετὰ σμικρῶν ἀλγηδόνων ἀπορρῆξαι.
 καὶ τοιοῦτο μὲν τὸ πέρας τῆς Ἡρῴδου γέγονεν τελευτῆς, ποινὴν δικαίαν ἐκτίσαντος ὧν ἀμφὶ τὴν Βηθλεὲμ ἀνεῖλεν παίδων τῆς τοῦ αωτῆρος ἡμῶν ἐπιβουλῆς ἕνεκα·
 μεθ’ ἢν ἄγγελος ὄναρ ἔπι·
 στὰς ἐν Αἰγύπτῳ διατρίβοντι τῷ Ἰωσὴφ ἀπᾶραι ἅμα τῷ παιδὶ καὶ τῆ τούτου μητρὶ ἐπὶ τὴν Ἰουδαίαν παρακελεύεται, τεθνηκέναι δηλῶν τοὺς ἀναζητοῦντας τὴν φυχὴν τοῦ παιδίου.
 τούτοις δ’ ὁ εὐαγγελιοτὴς ἐπιφέρει λέγων“ ἀκούσας δὲ ὅτι Ἀρχέλαος βασιλεύει ἀντὶ Ἡρῴδου τοῦ πατρὸς αὐτοῦ ἐφοβήθη ἐκεῖ ἀπελθεῖν·
 χργνατθσυεὶες δὲ κατ’ ὄναρ ἀνεχώρησεν εἰς τὰ μέρη τῆς Γαλιλαίας. ’
’ ΙΧ.
 Τῇ δ’ ἐπὶ τὴν ἀρχὴν μετὰ τὸν Ἡρῴδην τοῦ Ἀρχελάου καταστάσει συνᾴδει καὶ ὁ προειρημένος ἱστορικός, τόν τε τρόπον ἀναγράφων, καθ’ ὃν ἐκ διαθηκῶν Ἡρῴδου τοῦ πατρὸς ἐπικρίσεώς τε Καίσαρος Αὐγούστου τὴν κατὰ Ἰουδαίων βασιλείαν διεδέξατο, καὶ ὡς τῆς ἀρχῆς μετὰ δεκαέτη χρόνον ἀποπεσόντος οἱ ἀδελφοὶ Φίλιππός τε καὶ ὁ νέος‘ ῴδης ἅμα Λυσανίᾳ τὰς ἑαυτῶν διεῖπον τε.
 τετραρχίας.
 Ὁ δ’ αὐτὸς ἐν ὀκτωκαιδεκάτῳ τῆς’ Αρχαιο.
 λογίας κατὰ τὸ δωδέκατον ἔτος τῆς ιβεριου βασιλείας τοῦτον γὰρ τὴν καθ’ ὅλων ἀρχὴν διαδέξασθαι ἑπτὰ ἐπὶ πεντήκοντα ἔτεσιν τὴν ἡγεμονίαν ἐπικρατήσαντος Ἀὐγούστου) Πόντιον Πιλᾶτον τὴν Ἰουδαίαν ἐπιτραπῆναι δηλοῖ, ἐνταῦθα δὲ ἐφ’ ὅλοις ἔτεσιν δέκα αχεδὸν εἰς αὐτὴν παραμεῖναι τὴν Τιβερίου τελευτήν.
 οὐκοῦν σαφῶς makingthe third in additionto the two others alreadyput to death, and immeffiately gave up his life, torn by great agony.
 such was the end of Ηerοd:
 he paid a just penalty for the children that he murdered at Bethlehemfoithe sake ofhisplot against our saviour.
 Αfter this an angel appeared in a dream to Joseph, who was stying in Egypt, and commanded him to return to Judaea with the child and his mother, and announeed that those who sought the life οf the little child were dead.
 The evangelist continues by saying,“ Νοw when he heard that Archelaus was king in the room οfHerod his father, he was afraidto depart there, and, being warned ina dream, retired to the ffistriets of Galilee.
” IX.
 The historian already mentioned corroborates thc aceession to power ofArchelaus after Herod, describing both the way in which he succeeded to the kingdom of the jews by the testaments of Ηerod his father and the deeisionof Caesar Augustus, and how, when he fell from power after ten years, his οthers Philip andtheyounger Ηerod, together with Lysanias, administered their own tetrarchies.
 In the eighteenth book of the Antiquities the Same Josephus explains how Pontius Pilate was given the administration οf Judaea in the twelfth year of Tiberius( for hehadsucceeded to universal sovereignty after Αugustus had held the government for fifty- seven years), and for ten whole years he remained in office, almost until the death Tiberius.
 ἀπελήλεγκται τὸ πλάσμα τῶν κατὰ τοῦ σωτῆρος ἡμῶν ὑπομνήματα χθὲς καὶ πρῴην διαδεδωκότων, ἐν οἷς πρῶτος αὐτὸς ὁ τῆς παρασημειώσεως χρόνος τῶν πεπλακότων ἀπελέγχει τὸ ψεῦδος ἐπὶ τῆς τετάρτης δ’ οὖν ὑπατείας Τιβερίου, ἢ γέγονεν ἔτους ἑβδόμου τῆς βασιλείας αὐτοῦ, τὰ περὶ τὸ σωτήριον πάθος αὐτοῖς τολμηθέντα περιέχει, ὃν δείκνυται χρόνον μηδ’ ἐπιστάς πω τῇ Ἰουδαίᾳ Πιλᾶτος, εἴ γε τῷ Ἰωσήπῳ μάρτυρι χρήσασθαι δέον, σαφῶς οὕτως σημαίνοντι κατὰ τὴν δηλωθεῖσαν αὐτοῦ γραφὴν ὅτι δὴ δωδεκάτῳ ἐνιαυτῷ τῆς Τιβερίου βασιλείας ἐπίτροπος τῆς Ἰουδαίας ὑπὸ Τιβερίου καθίσταται Πιλᾶτος.
 X.
 Ἐπὶ τούτων δὴ οὖν, κατὰ τὸν εὐαγγελιστὴν ἔτος πεντεκαιδέκατον Τιβερίου Καίσαρος ἄγοντος τέταρτον δὲ τῆς ἡγεμονίας Ποντίου Πιλάτου, τῆς τε λοιπῆς Ἰουδαίας τετραρχούντων Ἡρῴδου καὶ Λυσανίου καὶ Φιλίππου, ὁ σωτὴρ καὶ κύριος ἡμῶν Ἰησοῦς ὁ Χριστὸς τοῦ θεοῦ, ἀρχόμενος ὡς εἰ ἐτῶν τριάκοντα, ἐπὶ τὸ Ἰωάννου βάπτισμα παραγίνεται, καταρχήν τε ποιεῖται τηνικαῦτα τοῦ κατὰ τὸ εὐαγγέλιον κηρύγματος.
 Φησὶν δὲ αὐτὸν ἡ θεία γραφὴ τὸν πάντα τῆς διδασκαλίας διατεΛέσαι χρόνον ἐπὶ ἀρχιερέως Ἄννα καὶ Καϊάφα, δηλοῦσα ὅτι δὴ ἐν τοῖς μεταξὺ So that thereis clear proof of the forgeryof those who recently or formerly have issued a series of Pilate's Reports 1 about our Savious;
 for in them the dates mentioned convict the forgers of untruth.
 They relate that the crime of the Saviour's death fell in the fourth consulship of Tiberius, which as the seventh year of his reign, but at that time ithasbeen shown that Pilate wasnot yet inchargeof Judaea,if Josephus may be used asa witness,for he clearly shows, in the writing quoted from him above, that it was aetually in the twelfth year of the reign of Tiberius that Pilate was appointed procurator of Judaea by Tiberius.
 X.
 In the timeofthese rulers them, according tothe evangelist, when Tiberius Caesar was in the fifteenth year of his reign and Pontius Pilate the fourth of his governorship, and Herod, Lysanias,and Philip were tetrarchsof the rest of Judaea, our Saviour and Lord, Jesus the Christ of Good,“ beginning to be about thirty years old” came tothe baptism of John and there began the proclamation of the gospel.
 The divine Scripture says that he completed the whole time of his teaching while Annas and Caiaphas were high priest, 3 showing that the τῆς τούτων ἔτεαιν λειτουργίας ὁ πᾶς τῆς διδασκαλίας συνεπεράνθη χρόνος.
 ἀρξαμένου μὲν οὖν κατὰ τὴν τοῦ Ἄννα παραμείναντος μέχρι δὲ τῆς ἀρχῆς τοῦ Καϊάφα παραμείναντος οὐδ’ ὅλος ὁ μεταξὺ τετραέτης παρίσταται χρόνος.
 τῶν γάρ τοι κατὰ τὸν νόμον ἤδη πως καθαιρουμένων ἐξ ἐκείνου θεσμῶν, λέλυτο μὲν ᾧ διὰ βίου καὶ ἐκ προγόνων διαδοχῆς τὰ τῆς τοῦ θεοῦ θεραπείας προσήκοντα ἢν, ὑπὸ δὲ τῶν Ῥωμαϊκῶν ἡγεμόνων ἄλλοτε ἄλλοι τὴν ἀρχιερωσύνην ἐπιτρεπόμενοι, οὐ πλεῖον ἔτους ἑνὸς ἐπὶ ταύτηςἴ’ διετέλουν.
 ἱστορεῖδ’ οὖν ὁ Ἰώσηπος τεσσαρας κατὰ διαδοχὴν ἐπὶ Καϊάφαν ἀρχιερεῖς μετὰ τὸν Ἄνναν διαγενέαθαι, κατὰ τὴν αὐτὴν τῆς Ἀρχαιολογίας γραφὴν ὧδέ πως λέγων“ Οὐαλέριος Γρᾶτος, παύσας ἱερᾶσθαι Ἄνανον, Ἰσμάηλον ἀρχιερέα ἀποφαίνει τὸν τοῦ Φαβι, καὶ τοῦτον δὲ μετ’ οὐ πολὺ μεταστήσας, Ἐλεάζαρον τὸν Ἀνάνου τοῦ ἀρχιερέως υἱὸν ἀποδείκνυσιν ἀρχιερέα.
 ἐνιαυτοῦ δὲ διαγενομένου καὶ τόνδε παύσας, Σίμωνι τῷ Καμίθου τὴν ἀρχιερωσύνην παραδίδωσιν.
 οὐ πλέον δὲ καὶ τῶδε ἐνιαυτοῦ τὴν τιμὴν ἔχοντι διεγένετο χρόνος, καὶ Ἰώσηπος, ὁ καὶ Καϊάφας, διάδοχος ἦν αὐτῷ.
 ” οὐκοῦν ὁ σύμπας οὐδ’ ὅλος τετραέτης ἀποδείκνυται τῆς τοῦ σωτῆρος ἡμῶν διδασκαλίας χρόνος, τεσσάρων ἐπὶ τέσσαρσιν ἔτεσιν ἀρχιερέων ἀπὸ τοῦ Ἄννα καὶ ἐπὶ τὴν τοῦ Καϊάφα κατάστασιν ἐνιαύσιον λειτουργίαν ἐκτετελεκότων.
 τόν γέ τοι Καϊάφαν ἀρχιερέα εἰκότως τοῦ ἐνιαυτοῦ, καθ’ ὃν τὰ τοῦ σωτηρίου πάθους ἐπετελεῖτο, ἡ τοῦ εὐαγγελίου παρεσημήνατο γραφή, ἐξ ἦς καὶ whole timeOf his teaehing Was bOunded by the years whieh cover their administration.
 since, then, he began in the high priesthood of Annas and continued to the reign of Caiaphas the intervening time does not not toa full four years.
 For since the regulations of the law were at that timealready in processof destruction the rule had been relaxed by which the duties of the serviceof God were held for life and by inherited succession, and the Roman goversors entrusted the high priesthood at different timesto different men, who did not hold this office for more than one year.
 Moreover Josephus relates that four high priests intervened in succession between Annas and Caiaphas, and speaks as follows in the textofthe Antiquities:
“ Valerius Gratus, having deprived Ananus of the priesthood, as as high Ρriest Ishmael the son of Phabi.
 Ηim, too, he removes shortly and nominates as high priest Eliezer thc son or Ananus the high priest.
 But when a year vas past he removes him also and hands over the high priesthood to Simon the son of Kamithus.
 But neither did his tenure of office last for more thana year,and Josephus,who isalso called Caiaphas, was his” Thus the whole timeofthe teaching of our saviour is shown to be not evena full four years;
 sinee from Αnnas to the appointment of Caiaphas in four years four high priests held the yearly office.
 Naturally, then, the scripture of the gospel has indicated cated eaiaphas as high priert of the year in which the Saviours's pasrion was completed, and from this also the time of the teaching of Christ is shown to be not αὐτῆς οὐκ ἀπᾴδων τῆς προκειμένης ἀποδείκνυται ὁ τῆς τοῦ χριστοῦ διδαακαλίας ἀποδείκνυται χρόνος.
 ἀλλὰ γὰρ ὁ σωτὴρ καὶ κύριος ἡμῶν οὐ μετὰ πλεῖστον τῆς καταρχῆς τοῦ κηρύγματος τοὺς δώδεκα ἀποστόλους ἀνακαλεῖται, οὕς καὶ μόνους τῶν λοιπῶν αὐτοῦ μαθητῶν κατά τι γέρας ἐξαίρετον ἀποστόλους ὠνόμασεν, καὶ αὖθις ἀναδείκνυσιν ἑτέρους ἑβδομήκοντα, οὓς καὶ αὐτοὺς ἀπέστειλεν ἀνὰ δύο δύο πρὸ προσώπου αὐτοῦ εἰς πάντα τόπον καὶ πόλιν οὗ ἤμελλεν αὐτὸς ἔρχεσθαι.
 ΧΙ.
 Οὐκ εἰς μακρὸν δὲ τοῦ βαπτιστοῦ Ἰωάννου ὑπὸ τοῦ νέου ‘ Ηρῴδου τὴν κεφαλὴν ἀποτμηθέντος μνημονεύει μὲν καὶ ἡ θεία τῶν εὐαγγελίων γραφή, συνιστορεῖ γε μὴν καὶ ὁ Ἰώσηπος, ὀνομαστὶ τῆς τε Ἡρῳδιάος μνήμην πεποιημένος καὶ ὡς ἀδελφοῦ γυναῖκα οὖσαν αὐτὴν ἠγάγετο πρὸς γάμον Ἡρῴδης, ἀθετήσας μὲν τὴν προτέραν αὐτῷ κατὰ νόμους γεγαμημένην Ἀρέτα δὲ ἦν αὕτη τοῦ Πετραίων βασιλέως θυγάτηρ), τὴν δὲ Ἡρῳδιάδα ζῶντος διαστήσας τοῦ ἀνδρός·
 δι’ ἢν καὶ τὸν Ἰωάννην ἀνελὼν πόλεμον αἴρεται πρὸς τὸν Ἀρέταν, ὡς ἂν ἠτιμασμένης αὐτῷ τῆς θυγατρός, ἐν ᾧ πολέμῳ μάχης γενομένης πάντα φησὶν τὸν Ἡρῴδου ατρατὸν διαφθαρῆναι καὶ ταῦτα πεπονθέναι τῆς ἐπιβουλῆς ἕνεκεν τῆς κατὰ τοῦ Ἰωάννου γεγενημένης.
 ὁ δ’ αὐτὸς Ἰώαηπος ἐν τοῖς μάλιστα δικαιότατον καὶ βαπτιστὴν ὁμολογῶν γεγονέναι τὸν Ἰωάννην, τοῖς περὶ αὐτοῦ κατὰ τὴν τῶν εὐαγγελίων γραφὴν ἀναγεγραμμένοις αυμμαρτυρεῖ, ἱστορεῖ δὲ καὶ τὸν Ἡρῴδην τῆς βασιλείας ἄπο·
 πεπτωκέναι διὰ τὴν αὐτὴν Ἡρῳδιάδα, μεθ’ ἦς αὐτὸν καὶ εἰς τὴν ὑπερορίαν ἀπεληλάσθαι, Βίενναν discordant with the preceding observation.
 Ηowever, οur Lordand Saviour calledthe twelve apostles not long after the beginningofhis preaching,and lo them alone of allhisdisciples did he give the hame of apostles asa speeial privilege.
 Afterwards he appointed seventy others, and them also he sent οut in advanceof him,two by two, to every place and city where he was to come himself.
 XI.
 The divene scripture of the gospels relates that not longafterwardsJohn the Baptist was beheaded hy.
 Herod the younger, and Josephus confirms the narrative, mentioning Herodiasby name,and telling how, though she was his brother's wife, Ηerod tookherin marriage,by putting aside her who had formerly been legally married to him( and shewasthe daughter οf Αretasthe king οf the Ρetraeans)and separating Herodias from her husband who was alive.
 For her sake, too,after killing John, he waged war with Aretas for the dishonour done his daughter;
 and Josephus says that inabattle in this warthe whole army of Ηerodwas destroyed,and that he suffered this because οf the plot against John.
 The same osephus admits that John was peculiarly righteous, anda baptits, confirming the testimony recorded in he text of the gospels concerning Hhlm.
 Ηe also elates that Ηerod Was deprived of his kingdom for the sake οfthe same Herodias, and was exiled with τῆς Γαλλίας πόλιν οἰκεῖν καταδικασθέντα.
 καὶ ταῦτά γε αὐτῷ ἐν ὀκτωκαιδεκάτῳ τῆς Ἀρχσιολογίας δεδήλωται, ἔνθα συλλαβαῖς αὐταῖς περὶ τοῦ Ἰωάννου ταῦτα γράφει“ Τισὶ δὲ τῶν Ἰουδαίων ἐδόκει ὀλωλέναι τὸν Joseph.
 A.
 I.
 Ἡρῴδου στρατὸν ὑπὸ τοῦ του θεοῦ, καὶ μάλα δικαίως τιννυμένου κατὰ ποινὴν Ἰωάννου τοῦ καλουμένου βαπτιστοῦ.
 κτείνει γὰρ τοῦτον Ἡρῴδης, ἀγαθὸν ἄνδρα καὶ τοῖς Ἰουδαίοις κελεύοντα ἀρετὴν ἐπασκοῦσιν καὶ τὰ πρὸς ἀλλήλους δικαιοσύνη καὶ πρὸς τὸν θεὸν εὐσεβείᾳ χρωμένους βαπτισμῷ συνιέναι·
 οὕτω γὰρ δὴ καὶ τὴν βάπτισιν ἀποδέκτην αὐτῷ φανεῖσθαι, μὴ ἐπί τινων ἁμαρτάδων παραιτήσει χρωμένων, ἀλλ’ ἐφ’ ἁγνείᾳ τοῦ σώματος, ἅτε δὴ καὶ τῆς φυχῆς δικαιοσύνῃ προεκκεκαθαρμένης.
 καὶ τῶν ἄλλων συστρεφομένων( καὶ γὰρ ἤρθησαν ἐπὶ πλεῖστον τῆ ἀκροάσει τῶν λόγων), δείσας Ἡρῴδης τὸ ἐπὶ τοσόνδε πιθανὸν αὐτοῦ τοῖς ἀνθρώποις, μὴ ἐπὶ ἀποστάσει τινὶ φέροι( πάντα γὰρ ἐοίκεσαν συμβουλῇ τῆ ἐκείνου πράξοντες), πολὺ κρεῖττον ἡγεῖται, πρίν τι νεώτερον ὑπ’ αὐτοῦ γενέσθαι, προλαβὼν ἀναιρεῖν, ἢ μεταβολῆς γενομένης εἰς πράγματα ἐμπεσὼν μετανοεῖν.
 καὶ ὁ μὲν ὑποφίᾳ τῆ Ἡρῴδου δέσμιος εἰς τὸν Μαχαιροῦντα πεμφθείς, τὸ προειρημένον φρούριον, ταύτῃ κτίννυται.
 ” Ταῦτα περὶ τοῦ Ἰωάννου διελθών, καὶ τοῦ her, being condemned to livein Vienne,a eity of Gaul.
 The aceOunt of these things is given in the eighteenth bookofthe Antiquities,where he writes concerning John exactly as follows:
“ Νow to some ofthe Jews it seemed that the army of Ηerod had been destroyed by OOd and that he was payinga very just penalty for John who was called the Baptist.
 For Ηerod killed him,a good man and one who commanded the Jews, training themselvesin virtue,to pracrise righteousness towards one another and piety towards God, and to come together for baptism.
 For he said that baptism would prove acceptable to him only in those who used it not to escape from any sins butfor bodily purity, on condition that the soul also had been previously cleansed thoroughly by righteousness.
 Αnd when the rest collected, for they were greariy eXeited at hearing his vords, Herod feared hiS great persuasiveness with men lest it should lead to some rising, for they appeared ready to do everything underhis advice.
 Ηe therefore eonsideredit mUeh better, beffirea revolt should spring from John, to put him to deathin anticipation, rather than be involved in difficulties through the actual revolution and then regret it.
 Αnd John, through Herod's suspicion, was senta prisoner to Macherus, the prison mentioned already, and was there put to death.
” Αfter narrating these things about John in the σωτῆρος ἡμῶν κάτα τὴν ἀυτὴν του συγγραμματος ἱστορίαν ὧδέ πως μέμνηται Γίνεται δὲ κατὰ τοῦτον τὸν χρόνον Ἰησοῦς σοφὸν ἀνὴρ, εἰ γε ἄνδρα αὐτὸν λέγειν χρὴ.
 ἦν γὰρ παραδόξων ἔργων ποιητής, διδάσκαλος ἀνθρώπων τῶν ἡδονῇ τἀληθῆ δεχομένων, καὶ πολλοὺς μὲν τῶν Ἰουδαίων, πολλοὺς δὲ καὶ ἀπὸ τοῦ Ἑλληνικοῦ ἐπηγάγετο.
 ὁ Χριστὸς οὗτος ἦν, καὶ αὐτὸν ἐνδείξει τῶν πρώτων ἀνδρῶν παρ’ ἡμῖν σταυτῷ ἐπιτετιμηκότος Πιλάτου, οὐκ ἐπαύσαντο οἱ τὸ πρῶτον ἀγαπήσαντες·
 ἐφάνη γὰρ αὐτοῖς τρίτην ἔχων ἡμέραν πάλιν ξῶν, τῶν θείων προφητῶν ταῦτά τε καὶ ἄλλα μυρία περὶ αὐτοῦ θαυμάσια εἰρηκότων.
 εἰς ἔτι τε νῦν τῶν Χριστιανῶν ἀπὸ τοῦδε ὠνομασμένων οὐκ ἐπέλιπε τὸ φῦλον.
” Ταῦτα τοῦ ἐξ αὐτῶν Ἑβραίων συγγραφέως ἀνέκαθεν τῇ ἑαυτοῦ γραφῆ περί τε τοῦ βαπτιστοῦ Ἰωάννου καὶ τοῦ σωτῆρος ἡμῶν παραδεδωκότος, τίς ἂν ἔτι λείποιτο ἀποφυγὴ τοῦ μὴ ἀνσισχύντους ἀπελέγχεσθαι τοὺς τὰ κατ’ αὐτῶν πλασαμένους ὑπομνήματα;
 ἀλλὰ ταῦτα μὲν ἐχέτω ταύτῃ.
 ΧΙΙ.
 Τῶν γε μὴν τοῦ σωτῆρος ἀποστόλων παντί τῳ σαφὴς ἐκ τῶν εὐαγγελίων ἡ πρόσρησις·
 τῶν δὲ ἑβδομήκοντα μαθητῶν κατάλογος μὲν οὐδεὶς οὐδαμῆ φέρεται, λέγεταί γε μὴν εἷς αὐτῶν Βαρνάβᾶς γεγονέναι, οὗ διαφόρως μὲν καὶ αἱ Πραξεῖς τῶν ἀποστόλων ἐμνημόνευσαν, οὐχ ἥκιστα δὲ καὶ Παῦλος Γαλάταις γράφων.
 τούτων δ᾿ εἶναί φασι καὶ Σωσθένην τὸν ἅμα Παύλῳ Κορινθίοις ἐπιστείλαντα·
 ἡ δ᾿ ἱστορία παρὰ Κλήμεντι κατὰ τὴν πέμπτην τῶν Ὑποτυπώσεων·
 ἐν ᾗ καὶ Κηφᾶν, περὶ οὗ φησιν ὁ Παῦλος “ ὅτε δὲ ἦλθεν Κηφᾶς same historical workhe speaks as follows concerning οur Saviour:
“ At thistimearose Jesus,a wise man, if indeedhe must becalleda man, for he Wasa doer of marvellous deeds,a teacher ofmen who received the uth with pleasure, and he led afterhim many oftheJews and many alsoof the Oentile population.
 This was the Christ;
 and when Pilate had eondemned himo the cross at the instigationof the leaffingmen among us, those whohad nrst loved him did not to do so, ror he appeared to them when three days dead restored to life, and the divine prophets had told these and ten thousand other wonders concerning him.
 Αnd up till now the tribeofChristians which me named after him has not died οut.
 ” When a writer sprung from the Hebrews themselves handed οn in his οwn writing these details concerning John the Baptist and our Saviour, what altemative is there but to convict of shamelessness those who have concocted the Reports about them?1 But let this suffice.
 XII.
 Νow the names of the apostles of our saviour are plain to everyone formthe gospels,but no list of the Seventyis anywhere extant.
 It is said, however, that oneofthem was Bamabas, and ofhim the Actsofthe Αpostles has also made special mention, and so also has Ρaul when writing to the Galatians.
 Αnd they say that sosthenes too, who wrote with Paul tothe Corinthians,was one of them.
 And there is the storyin clement, in the Rfthbookthe Hypotyposes,in which he says that Cephas, concerning whom Ρaul says“ and when Cephas εἰς Ἀντιόχειαν, κατὰ πρόσωπον αὐτῷ ἀντέατην,’’ ἕνα φησὶ γεγονέναι τῶν ἑβδομήκοντα μαθητῶν, ὁμώνυμον Πέτρῳ τυγχάνοντα τῷ ἀποστόλῳ.
 καὶ Ματθίαν δὲ τὸν ἀντὶ Ἰούδα τοῖς ἀποστόλοις συγκαταλεγέντα τόν τε σὺν αὐτῷ τῆ ὁμοίᾳ ψήφῳ τιμηθέντα τῆς αὐτῆς τῶν ἑβδομήκοντα κλήσεως ἠξιῶσθαι κατέχει λόγος.
 καὶ Θαδδαῖον δὲ ἕνα τῶν αὐτῶν εἶναί φασι, περὶ οὗ καὶ ἱστορίαν ἐλθοῦσαν εἰς ἡμᾶς αὐτίκα μάλα ἐκθήσομαι.
 καὶ τῶν ἑβδομήκοντα δὲ πλείους τοῦ σωτῆρος πεφηνέναι μαθητὰς εὕροις ἂν ἐπιτηρήσας, μάρτυρι χρώμενος τῷ Παύλῳ, μετὰ τὴν ἐκ νεκρῶν ἔγερσιν ὦφθαι αὐτὸν φήσαντι πρῶτον μὲν Κηφᾷ, ἔπειτα τοῖς δώδεκα, καὶ μετὰ τούτους ἐπάνω πετακοσίοις ἀδελφοῖς ἐφάπαξ, ὧν τινὰς μὲν ἔφασκεν κεκοιμῆσθαι, τοὺς πλείουςδ’ ἔτι τῷ βίῳ, καθ’ ὃν καιρὸν αὐτῷ ταῦτα συνετάττετο, περιμένειν·
 ἔπειτα δ’ ὦφθαι αὐτὸν Ἰακώβῳ φησίν·
 εἷς δὲ καὶ οὗτος τῶν φερομένων τοῦ σωτῆρος ἀδελφῶν ἢν·
 εἶθ’ ὡς παρὰ τούτους κατὰ μίμησιν τῶν δώδεκα πλείστων ὅσων ὑπαρξάντων ἀποστόλων, οἷος καὶ αὐτὸς ὁ Παῦλος ἢν, προστίθησι λέγων ἔπειτα ὤφθη τοῖς ἀποστόλοις πᾶσιν.
 ” ταῦτα μὲν οὗν περὶ τῶνδε.
 ΧΙΙΙ.
 Τῆς δὲ περὶ τὸν Θαδδαῖον ἱστορίας τοιοῦτος γέγονεν ὁ τρόπος.
 ἡ τοῦ κυρίου καὶ σωτῆρος ἡμῶν Ἰησοῦ Χριστοῦ θειότης, εἰς πάντας ἀνθρώπους τῆς παραδοξοποιοῦ δυνάμεως ἕνεκεν βοωμένη, μυρίους ὅσους καὶ τῶν ἐπ’ ἀλλοδαπῆς πορρωτάτω ὄντων τῆς Ἰουδαίας νόσων καὶ παντοίων παθῶν ἐλπίδι θεραπείας ἐπήγετο.
 ταύτῃ τοι βασιλεὺς Ἀβγαρος, τῶν ὑπὲρ Εὐφράτην ἐθνῶν ἐπιση- came to AntiochI withstood him to face,” one ofthe Seventy disciples, wllo had the same name as the apostle Ρeter.
 Traffition also relates that Μatthias, who was reckoned with the apostle in theplace of Judas, and he who was honoured with him at the same casting of lots had been called among the Seventy.
 They also say that Thaddaeus was one or them, andI will shortly recounta narrative which has reaehed us concerning him.
 Αnd eonsideration would show yoll that there Were more diseiples of the saviour thanthe seventy,if you used Ρaulasa witness, for he says that arter the resurrection from the dead Jesus was seen first by Cephas, afterwards by the twelve, and after these by above five hundred brethren at once;
 of whom he says that some had fallen asleep, but the majority remained alive at at tlle time that he composed this account.
 He says thathe was thenseenby James, who wasone of the allegedbrethrenof the Saviour, and then, as though in additionto these therehadbeen numberless apostles,on the modelofthe twelve, like Ρaul himself, he goes on to say“ then he was seen by all the apostles.
” This then for them.
 XIII.
 The manner of the narrative concerning Thaddaeus is as follows.
 The divinity of our Lord and saviour Jesus Christ beeame famous among all men because of his wonder- working power, and led to him myriads even of those who in foreign lands were far remote from Judaea, in the hope of healing from diseases and from ah kinds of sufferings.
 In this wayKing Αbgar,the celebrated monarch ofthe μότατα δυναστεύων, πάθει τὸ αῶμα δεινῷ καὶ οὐ θεραπευτῷ δάον ἐπ’ ἀνθρωπείᾳ δυνάμει καταφθειρόμενος, φθειρόμενος, ὡς καὶ τοὔνομα τοῦ Ἰησοῦ πολὺ καὶ τὰς δυνάμεις συμφώνως πρὸς ἁπάντων μαρτυρουμένας ἐπύθετο, ἱκέτης αὐτοῦ πέμψας δι’ ἐπιστοληφόρου γίνεται, τῆς νόσου τυχεῖν ἀπαλλαγῆς ἀξιῶν.
 ὁ δὲ μὴ τότε καλοῦντι ὑπακούσας, ἐπιστολῆς γοῦν αὐτὸν ἰδίας καταξιοῖ, ἕνα τῶν αὐτοῦ μαθητῶν ἀποστέλλειν ἐπὶ θεραπείᾳ τῆς νόσου ὁμοῦ τε αὐτοῦ σωτηρίᾳ καὶ τῶν προσηκόντων ἁπάντων ὑπισχνούμενος.
 οὐκ εἰς μακρὸν δὲ ἄρα αὐτῷ ἐπληροῦτο τὰ τῆς ἐπαγγελίας.
 μετὰ γοῦν τὴν ἐκ νεκρῶν ἀνάστασιν αὐτοῦ καὶ τὴν εἰς οὐρανοὺς ἄνοδον Θωμᾶς, τῶν ἀποστόλων εἷς τῶν δώδεκα, Θαδδαῖον, ἐν ἀριθμῷ καὶ αὐτὸν τῶν ἑβδομήκοντα τοῦ Χριστοῦ μαθητῶν κατειλεγμένον, κινήσει θειοτέρᾳ ἐπὶ τὰ Ἔδεσσα κήρυκα καὶ εὐαγγελιστὴν τῆς περὶ τοῦ χριστοῦ διδασκαλίας ἐκπέμπει, πάντα τε δι’ αὐτοῦ τὰ τῆς τοῦ σωτῆρος ἡμῶν τέλος ἐλάμβανεν ἐπαγγελίας.
 ἔχεις καὶ τούτων ἀνάγραπτον τὴν μαρτυρίαν, ἐκ τῶν κατὰ Ἕδεσσαν τὸ τηνικάδε βασιλευομένην πόλιν γραμματοφυλακείων ληφθεῖσαν·
 ἐν γοῦν τοῖς αὐτόθι δημοσίοις χάρταις, τοῖς τὰ παλαιὰ καὶ τὰ ἀμφὶ τὸν Ἄβγαρον πραχθέντα περιέχουσι, καὶ ταῦτα εἰς ἔτι νῦν ἐξ ἐκείνου πεφυλαγμένα εὕρηται, οὐδὲν δὲ οἷον καὶ αὐτῶν ἐπακοῦσαι τῶν ἐπιστολῶν, ἀπὸ τῶν ἀρχείων ἡμῖν ἀναληφθεισῶν καὶ τόνδε αὐτοῖς ῥήμασιν ἐκ τῆς Σύρων φωνῆς μεταβληθεισῶν τὸν τρόπον·
 nations beyond the Euphrates, perishing from terrible suffering in his body, beyond human power to heal, when he heard much of the name οf Jesus and of the miracles attested unanimously by all men, became his suppliant and sent to him by the bearer ofa letter, asking to find relief from his disease.
 Jesus did not give heed to his requestatthe time,yet vouehsafed hima letter of his own, promising to send one of his disciples for the cure of his disease, and forthe salvation alikeof himself and of all his relations.
 Nor were the terms οf his promise longin being fulfilled.
 Αfter his resurrection from the dead and return into heaven, Thomas,one ofthe twelve apostles, was divinely moved to send to Edessa Thaddaeus, who was himself reckoned among the number of the Seventy disciples, as herald and evanglist οf the teachingabout Christ,and through him all the terms οf our Saviour's promise received fulfilment.
 There is also documentary evidence οf these things taken from the archives at Edessa whieh was at that timea capital city.
 At least, in thepublic documents there, which containthe things done in antiquity and at the timeof Αbgar, these things too are found preserved from that time to this;
 but there is nothing equal to hearing the letters themselves, which we have extracted from the archives, and when translated from the Syriac they are verbally as follows:
 ΑΝΤΙΓΡΑΦΟΝ ΕΠΙΣΤΟΛΗΣ ΓΡΑΦΕΙΣΗΣ ΥΠΟ ΑΒΓΑΡΟΥ ΤΟΠΑΡΧΟΥ ΤΩΙ ΙΗΣΟΥ ΚΑΙ ΠΕΜΦΘΕΙΣΗΣ ΑΥΤΩΙ ΔΙ’ ΑΝΑΝΙΟΥ ΤΑΧΥΔΡΟΜΟΥ ΕΙΣ ΙΕΡΟΣΟΛΥΜΑ“ Ἄβγαρος Οὐχαμα τοπάρχης Ἰησοῦ σωτῆρι ἀγαθῷ ἀναφανέντι ἐν τόπῳ Ἱεροσολύμων χαίρειν.
 ἤκουσταί μοι τὰ περὶ ἀοῦ καὶ τῶν σῶν ἰαμάτων, ὡς ἄνευ φαρμάκων καὶ βοτανῶν ὑπὸ σοῦ γινομένων.
 ὡς γὰρ λόγος, τυφλοὺς ἀναβλέπειν ποιεῖς, χωλοὺς περιπατεῖν, καὶ λεπροὺς καθαρίζεις, καὶ ἀκάθαρτα πνεύματα καὶ δαίμονας ἐκβάλλεις, καὶ τοὺς ἐν μακρονοσίᾳ βασανιζομένου θεραπεύεις, καὶ νεκροὺς ἐγείρεις.
 καὶ ταῦτα πάντα ἀκούσας περὶ σοῦ, κατὰ νοῦν ἐθέμην τὸ ἕτερον τῶν δύο, ἢ ὅτι σὺ εἶ ὁ θεὸς καὶ καταβὰς ἀπὸ τοῦ οὐρανοῦ ποιεῖς ταῦτα, ἢ υἱὸς εἶ τοῦ θεοῦ ποιῶν ταῦτα.
 διὰ τοῦτο τοίνυν γραφὰς ἐδεήθην ἀοῦ σκυλῆναι πρός με καὶ τὸ πάθος, ὃ ἔχω, θεραπεῦσαι.
 καὶ γὰρ ἤκουσα ὅτι καὶ Ἰουδαῖοι καταγογγύξουσί σου καὶ βούλονται κακῶσαί σε.
 πόλις δὲ μικροτάτη μοί ἐστι καὶ σεμνή, ἥτις ἐξαρκεῖ ἀμφοτέροις.
 ΤΑ ΑΝΤΙΓΡΑΦΕΝΤΑ ΥΠΟ ΙΗΣΟΥ ΔΙΑ ΑΝΑΝΙΟΥ ΤΑΧΥΔΡΟΜΟΥ ΤΟΠΑΡΧΗΙ ΑΒΓΑΡΩΙ“ Μακάριος εἶ πιστεύσας ἐν ἐμοί, μὴ ἑορακώς?? με.
 γέγραπται γὰρ περὶ ἐμοῦ τοὺς ἑορακότας με μὴ πιστεύσειν ἐν ἐμοί, καὶ ἵνα οἱ μὴ ἑορακότες με αὐτοὶ πιστεύσωσι καὶ ζήσονται.
 περὶ δὲ οὗAcopy ofaletter ruritten by Abgar the Toparch to Jesus and sent to him Jerusalem by courier Ananias.
“ Αbgar Uchama, the Toparhc, to Jesus the good aviour who has appeared in the districtof Jerusalem, eeting.
I have heard.
.
 concerning you and your ures, how they are accomprlshed by you without ugs and herbs.
 For, as thestory goes,you make he blind recover their sight, the lame walk, andhu cleanse lepers, and cast out unclean sspirits and emons, and you cure those who are tortured by long isease and you raise dead men.
 Αnd when 1 heard these things concerning youI decided that it isonethe two, either thatyouare God, and came down οm heaven todo these things, or area son of God οr doing these things.
 For this reasonI write to beg ou to hastentome and to heal thesuffering whichΙ have.
 MoreoverI heard thatthe Jews are mocking you, and wish to ill- great you.
 NowI haveacity very smallandvenerable which is enoughfor both.
 ” 1 The reply from Jesus to Abgar, the Toparch, by the courier Ananias.
“ Blessed art thou who didst believe in me not haring seen me, for itis written concerningme that osewhohave seen me willnotbelieve on me,nd that those who have not seen me will believe nd live.
 Now concerning what you you wrote me, ἔγραψάς μοι ἐλθεῖν πρὸς σέ, δέον ἐστὶ πάντα δι’ ἃ ἀπεστάλην ἐνταῦθα, πληρῶσαι καὶ μετὰ τὸ στείλαντά οὕτως ἀναληφθῆναι πρὸς τὸν ἀποστείλαντά με.
 καὶ ἐπειδὰν ἀναληφθῶ, ἀποστελῶ σοί τινα τῶν μαθητῶν μου, ἵνα ἰάσηταί σου τὸ πάθος καὶ ζωήν ἀοῖ καὶ τοῖς σὺν ἀοῖ παράσχηται.
 ” Ταύταις δὲ ταῖς ἐπιστολαῖς ἔτι καὶ ταῦτα συνῆπτο τῆ Σύρων φωνῇ·
 Μετὰ δὲ τὸ ἀναληφθῆναι τὸν Ἰησοῦν ἀπέστειλεν αὐτῷ Ἰούδας, ὁ καὶ Θωμᾶς, Θαδδαῖον ἀπόστολον, ἕνα τῶν ἑβδομήκοντα·
 ὃς ἐλθὼν κατέμενεν πρὸς Τωβίαν τὸν τοῦ Τωβία.
 ὡς δὲ ἠκούσθη περὶ αὐτοῦ, 1 ἐμηνύθη τῷ Ἀβγάρῳ ὅτι ἐλήλυθεν ἀπόστολος ἐνταῦθα τοῦ Ἰησοῦ, καθὰ ἐπέστειλέν σοι.
 ἤρξατο οὖν ὁ Θαδδαῖος ἐν δυνάμει θεοῦ θεραπεύειν πᾶσαν νόσον καὶ μαλακίαν, ὥστε πάντας θαυμάζειν·
 ὡς δὲ ἤκουσεν ὁ Ἄβγαρος τὰ μεγαλεῖα καὶ τὰ θαυμάσια ἃ ἐποίει, καὶ ὡς ἐθεράπευεν, ἐν ὑπονοίᾳ γέγονεν ὡς ὅτι αὐτός ἐστιν περὶ οὗ ὁ Ἰησοῦς ἐπέστειΛεν λέγων ἐπειδὰν ἀναληφθῶ, ἀποστελῶ ἀοῖ τινα τῶν μαθητῶν μου, ὃς τὸ πάθος ἀοῦ ἰάσεται. ’
 μετακαλεσάμενος οὖν τὸν Τωβίαν, παρ’ ᾧ κατέμενεν, εἶπεν ἴ’ ἤκουσα ὅτι ἀνήρ τις δυνάστης ἐλθὼν κατέμεινεν ἐν τῆ αῇ οἰκίᾳ·
 ἀνάγαγε αὐτὸν πρός με. ’
 2 ἐλθὼν δὲ ὁ Τωβίας παρὰ Θαδδαίῳ, εἶπεν αὐτῷ ἴ’ ὁ τοπάρχης Ἄβγαρος μετακαλεσάμενός με εἶπεν ἀναγαγεῖν ἄε παρ’ αὐτῷ, ἵνα θεραπεύσῃς αὐτόν.’
 καὶ ὁ Θαδδαῖος, to cometo you,I must hrst complete here all for whichI was sent, and after thus completing it be taken up to him who sent me, and whenΙ have been taken up,I Will send to you one of my disciples tohealyour suffering,give life toyou and those with you.
” To theSe letters the following is further appended in the Syriac:
“ Νow after the aseension of Jesus, Judas, who is also Thomas, Sent ThaddaeuS to him aS an apoStle, being οne of the seventy, and he came andstayed with Tobias, the sonof Tobias.
 Νow when news of him was heard, 1 it was reported to Αbgar that an Αpostle of Jesus has come here, as he wrote to you.
 so ThaddaeuS began in the power of Ood to heal every disease and WeakneSs So that all marvelled Αnd when Αbgar heard the great and wonderful deeds which he was doing, and how he was working cures, he began to suWct that this was he of whom Jesus had written saying,‘ WhenΙ have been taken up,I will send you one of my discipleS who will heal your’ so he SummonedTobias, with whomThaddaeuS was staying, and said,‘I hear thata certain manof power haS come and is staying in your houSe.
 Bring him to me.
 ' 2 Αnd Tobias came to Thaddaeus and said to him,‘ The Toparch.
 Αbgar, summoned me and bade me bring you to him in order to heal’ Αnd Thad- ἀναβαίνω,’ ἔφη, ἐπειδήπερ δυνάμει παρ’ αὐτῷ ἀπέσταλμα. ’
 ὀρθρίσας οὖν ὁ Τωβίας τῇ ἑξῆς καὶ παραλαβὼν τὸν Θαδδαῖον ἦλθεν πρὸς τὸν Ἄβγαρον.
 ὡς δὲ ἀνέβη, παρόντων καὶ ἑστώτων τῶν μεγιστάνων αὐτοῦ, παραχρῆμα ἐν τῷ εἰσιέναι αὐτὸν δρᾶμα μέγα ἐφάνη τῷ Ἀβγάρῳ ἐν τῷ προσώπῳ τοῦ ἀποστόλου Θαδδαίου·
 ὅπερ ἰδὼν Ἄβγαρος προσεκύνησεν τῷ Θαδδαίῳ, θαῦμά τε ἔσχεν πάντας τοὺς περιεστῶτας·
 αὐτοὶ γὰρ οὐχ ἑοράκασι τὸ ὅραμα, δ’ μόνῳ τῷ Ἀβγάρῳ ἐφάνη·
 ὃς καὶ τὸν Θαδδαῖον ἤρετο εἰ ἐπ’ ἀληθείας μαθητὴς εἶ Ἰησοῦ τοῦ υἱοῦ τοῦ θεοῦ, ὃς εἰρήκει πρός με“ ἀποστελῶ ἀοῖ τινα τῶν μαθητῶν μου, ὅστις ἰάσεταί σε καὶ ζωήν σοι παρέξει.’
 ’ ’ καὶ ὁ Θαδδαῖος ἔφη‘ ἐπεὶ μεγάλως πεπίστευκας εἰς τὸν ἀποστείλαντά με, διὰ τοῦτο ἀπεστάλην πρὸς σέ.
 καὶ πάλιν, ἐὰν πιστεύσῃς ἐν αὐτῷ, ὡς ἄν πιστεύσῃς ἕαται ἀοῖ τὰ αἰτήματα τῆς καρδίας σου.
 καὶ ὁ Ἄβγαρος πρὸς αὐτόν οὕτως ἐπίστευασ,’ φησίν,‘ ἐν αὐτῷ, ὡς καὶ τοὺς Ἰουδαίους τοὺς σταυρώσαντας αὐτὸν βουληθῆναι δύναμιν παραλαβὼν κατακόψαι, εἰ μὴ διὰ τὴν βασιλείαν τὴν Ῥωμαίων ἀνεκόπην τούτου.’
 καὶ ὁ Θαδδαῖος εἶπεν ὁ κύριος ἡμῶν τὸ θέλημα τοῦ πατρὸς αὐτοῦ πεπλήρωκεν καὶ πληρώσας ἀνελήφθη πρὸς τὸν πατέρα. ’
 λέγει αὐτῷ Ἄβγαρος‘ κἀγὼ πεπίστευκα εἰς αὐτὸν καὶ εἰς τὸν πατέρα αὐτοῦ.
 καὶ ὁ Θαδδαὶος‘‘ διὰ τοῦτο,’ φηαί,‘‘ τίθημι τὴν χεῖρά μου ἐπὶ ἀὲ ἐν ὀνόματι αὐτοῦ καὶ τοῦτο πράξαντος, παραχρῆμα ἐθεραπεύθη τῆς νόσου καὶ τοῦ πάθους οὗ εἶχεν.
 ἐθαύμασέν τε ὁ Ἄβγαρος ὅτι καθὼς ἤκουσται αὐτῷ περὶ τοῦ Ἰησοῦ, οὕτως daeus said,‘Ι will goup sinceI haVe been miracylously Sent to’ so Tobias rOse up early the next day and taking Thaddaeus eame to Αbgar.
 Now as he went up, while the king's magnates ere standing present, aS soon as he entered a great vision appeared to Αbgar on the face of the Αpostle Thaddaeus.
.
 Αnd when Abgarsaw this, he did to Thaddaeus, and wonder held all who were standing by, for they had not seen the Vision, Which appeared only to Αbgar.
 And he asked Thaddaeus,‘ Are you Of a truthadisciple of Jesus, the Sonof God, who Said tO me, “I will send you one of my disciples who will heal you and give you life’’?’Αnd Thaddaeus said,‘ Since you have hae had great faith in him who sent me,Ι was sent to youfOr this reason.
 Αnd agam;
 if you believein him, the request of your heart rilall be to youas you’Αnd Αbgar said to him, ‘I have such belief in him as to have wished to take force and destroy the JewS who crucifified him, hadI not been preventedfrom this bythe Roman’Αnd ThaddaeuS said,‘ Οur Lord has fuffilled the will of his Father, and after fulfilling it has been takenupto the’Αnd Αbgar said to him,‘ too too havebelievedon him andonhis’Αnd Thaddaeus said,‘ For this causeΙ put my handon you’And when hedidthis immediately hewas healed from the diseaSe and the sufferings he had.
 And Αbgar vondered that just as he had heard concerning Jesus τοῖς ἔργοις παρέλαβεν διὰ τοῦ μαθητοῦ αὐτοῦ Θαδδαίου, ὃς αὐτὸν ἄνευ φαρμακείας καὶ βοτανῶν ἐθεράπευσεν, καὶ οὐ μόνον, ἀλλὰ καὶ Ἄβδον τὸν τοῦ Ἄβδου, ποδάγραν ἔχοντα·
 ὃς καὶ αὐτὸς προσελθὼν ὑπὸ τοὺς πόδας αὐτοῦ ἔπεσεν, εὐχάς τε διὰ χειρὸς λαβὼν ἐθεραπεύθη, πολλούς τε ἄλλους συμπολίτας αὐτῶν ὁ αὐτὸς ἰάσατο, θαυμαστὰ καὶ μεγάλα ποιῶν καὶ κηρύσσων τὸν λόγον τοῦ θεοῦ.
 μετὰ δὲ ταῦτα ὁ Ἄβγαρος‘ σὺ Θαδδαῖε,’ ἔφη, ‘ σὺν δυνάμει τοῦ θεοῦ ταῦτα ποιεῖς καὶ ἡμεῖς αὐτοὶ ἐθαυμάσαμεν·
 ἀλλ’ ἐπὶ τούτοις δέομαί σου, διήγησαί μοι περὶ τῆς ἐλεύσεως τοῦ Ιησοῦ πῶς ἐγένετο, καὶ περὶ τῆς δυνάμεως αὐτοῦ, καὶ ἐν ποίᾳ δυνάμει ταῦτα ἐποίει ἅτινα ἤκουσταί μοι.
 καὶ ὁ Θαδδαῖος‘ ‘ νῦν μὲν σιωπήσομαι,’ ἔφη, ἐπεὶ δὲ κηρῦξαι τὸν λόγον ἀπεστάλην, αὔριον ἐκκλησίασόν μοι τοὺς πολίτας σου πάντας, καὶ ἐπ’ αὐτῶν κηρύξω καὶ σπερῶ ἐν αὐτοῖς τὸν λόγον τῆς ζωῆς, περί τε τῆς ἐλεύσεως τοῦ Ἰησοῦ καθὼς ἐγένετο, καὶ περὶ τῆς ἀποστολῆς αὐτοῦ, καὶ ἕνεκα τίνος ἀπεστάΛη ὑπὸ τοῦ πατρός, καὶ περὶ τῆς δυνάμεως καὶ τῶν ἔργων αὐτοῦ καὶ μυστηρίων ὧν ἐΛάΛησεν ἐν κόσμῳ, καὶ ποίᾳ δυνάμει ταῦτα ἐποίει, καὶ περὶ τῆς καινῆς αὐτοῦ κηρύξεως, καὶ περὶ τῆς μικρότητος καὶ περὶ τῆς ταπεινώσεως, καὶ πῶς ἐταπείνωσεν ἑαυτὸν καὶ ἀπέθετο καὶ ἐαμίκρυνεν αὐτοῦ τὴν θεότητα, καὶ ἐσταυρώθη, καὶ κατέβη εἰς τὸν Ἅιδην, καὶ διέσχισε φραγμὸν τὸν ἐξ αἰῶνος μὴ σχισθέντα, καὶ ἀνήγειρεν νεκροὺς καὶ κατέβη μόνος, ἀνέβη δὲ μετὰ πολλοῦ ὄχλου πρὸς τὸν πατέρα αὐτοῦ.
 1’ ἐκέλευσεν so he had in fact received through hiS diSciple Thaddaeus, who cured him without drugs and herbs, and not only him but also ΑbduS the son of Αbdus who had the gout;
 for he too eame and fell at hiS feet, and received his prayer at hiS hands, and waS healed.
 Αnd the Same Thaddaeus healed many others of their fellow- citizens, performing many wonderful deeds and preaehing the word of Ood.
 Αnd after this Αbgar said,‘O Thaddaeus, it is by the power of Ood that youdo these thingS, and we ourselves have wondered.
 But in addition to thisIbeg you, explain to me concerning the coming of Jesus,how it happened, and eoneerninghis power,and by what powerhedid these things of whichI have’Αnd Thaddaeus said,I willnowbe rilent, but SineeI waS Sent to preachthe word, summon for me to- morroW an aSSembly ofallyour cirilens, andΙ will preach before them, and sow in them the Word of life, both coneerning the coming οf Jesus, how it happened,and concerning his mission,and for what reasonhe was sent by the Father, and concerning his power, and his deeds, and the mysterieS Which he spoke in the world, and by what power he did these things, and concerning his new preaching, and concerning his lowliness and humiliation, and how he humbled himself, and put aside and made little his divinity, and was crucffied, and descended into Ηades, and rent the partition hich had not been rent from the beginning of the orld, and raised the dead, and he went down alone, ut witha great multitude did he go up to hiS οὖν ὁ Ἄβγαρος τῆ ἕωθεν συνάξαι τοὺς πολίτας αὐτοῦ καὶ ἀκοῦσαι τὴν κήρυξιν Θαδδαίου, καὶ μετὰ ταῦτα προσέταξεν δοθῆναι αὐτῷ χρυσὸν καὶ ἄσημον.
 ὁ δὲ οὐκ ἐδέξατο, εἰπών εἰ τὰ ἡμέτερα καταλελοίπαμεν, πῶς τὰ ἀλλότρια ληψόμεθα;’
 ἐπράχθη ταῦτα τεσσαρακοστῷ καὶ τριακοσιοστῶ ἔτει. ’
Ἃ καὶ οὐκ εἰς ἄχρηστον πρὸς λέξιν ἐκ τῆς Σύρων μεταβληθέντα φωνῆς ἐνταῦθά μοι κατὰ καιρὸν κείαθω.
 Father.
 ' 1 So Αbgar commanded his citizens assemble in the morning and to hear the preaching of Thaddaeus, and arter this he ordered him to be giVen gold and plate, but he did not receive it, Saying,If we haVe left our own things, how shanwetake thoSe of others7.’
 These things were done in the 340th year.
 ” 2 Let thiS valuable and literal tranSlation from the syriae Suffiee me for the present.
 Bݲ Τάδε καὶ ἡ βݲ περιέχει βίβλος τῆς Ἐκκλησιαστικῆς ἱστορίας Αݲ Περὶ τῆς μετὰ τὴν ἀνάληψιν τοῦ Χριστοῦ διαγωγῆς τῶν ἀποστόλων.
 Bݲ Ὅπως Τιβέριος ὑπὸ Πιλάτου τὰ περὶ τοῦ Χριστοῦ διδαχθεὶς ἐκινήθη.
 Γݲ Ὅπως εἰς πάντα τὸν κόσμον ἐν βραχεῖ χρόνῳ διέδραμεν ὁ περὶ τοῦ χριστοῦ λόγος.
 Δݲ Ὡς μετὰ Τιβέριον γάιος Ἰουδαίων καθίστησιν Ἀγρίππαν, τὸν Ἡρῴδην ἀϊδίῳ ζημιώσας φυγῇ.
 Eݲ Ὡς Φίλων ὑπὲρ Ἰουδαίων πρεσβείαν ἐστείλατο πρὸς γάιον.
 ςݲ Ὅσα Ἰουδαίοις συνερρύη κακὰ μετὰ τὴν κατὰ τοῦ χριστοῦ τόλμαν.
 Ζݲ ὃς καὶ Πιλᾶτος ἑαυτὸν διεχρήσατο.
 Ηݲ Περὶ τοῦ κατὰ Κλαύδιον λιμοῦ.
 Θݲ Μαρτύριον Ἰακώβου τοῦ ἀποστόλου.
 Ιݲ Ὡς Ἀγρίππας ὁ καὶ Ἡρῴδης τοὺς ἀποστόλους διώξας τῆς θείας παραυτίκα δίκης ᾔσθετο.
 ΙݲΑݲ Περὶ Θευδᾶ τοῦ γόητος.
 ΙݲΒݲ Περὶ Ἑλένης τῆς τῶν Ἀδιαβηνῶν βασιλίδος.
 ΙݲΓݲ Περὶ Σίμωνος τοῦ μὰγου.
 CΟΝTEΝTS ΟF BΟΟΚ IΙ Τhe contents of the second book of the History of the Church is as follows:
 I.
 On the lifeofthe Apostles afterthe Ascension of Christ.
 ΙΙ.
 On the emotionof Tiberius at learning from Pilate the story of Christ.
 III.
 How in a short time the message concerning Christ ran through the whole world.
 IV.
 How after Tiberhb Caius appointed Agrippa as King of the Jews and punished Herod with perpetual banishment.
 V.
 How Philo was sent on an embassy to Caius on behalf Of the Jews.
 VI.
 ΑlΙ the evils which accumulated on the Jews after their crime against Christ.
 VII.
 How Pilate, too, committed suicide.
 VIII.
 Concerning the famine in the the of Claudius.
 IX.
 The martyrdOm οf James the Apostle.
 X.
 How Agrippa, who was also called Herod, perecuted the Apostles and at once feltthe punishment of God.
 XI.
 On Theudas the magician.
 XII.
 On Helena the Queen of the Adiabeni.
 XIII.
 On Simon Magus.
 ΙΔݲ Περὶ τοῦ κατὰ Ῥώμην κηρύγματος Πέτρου τοῦ ἀποστόλου.
 ΙΕݲ Περὶ τοῦ κατὰ Μάρκον εὐαγγελίου.
 Ιςݲ Ὡς πρῶτος Μάρκος τοῖς κατ’ Αἴγυπτον__ τὴν εἰς τὸν χριστὸν γνῶσιν ἐκήρυξεν.
 ΙΖݲ Οἶα περὶ τῶν κατ’ Αἴγυπτον ἀσκητῶν ὁ Φίλων ἱστορεῖ.
 ΙΗݲ Ὅσα τοῦ Φίλωνος εἰς ἡμᾶς περιῆλθεν συγγράμματα.
 ΙΘݲ Οἴα τοὺς ἐν Ἱεροσολύμοις Ἰουδαίους οὕμ’.
 φορὰ μετῆλθεν ἐν τῆ τοῦ πάσχα ἡμέρᾳ.
 Κݲ Οἷα καὶ κατὰ Νέρωνα ἐν τοῖς Ἱεροσολύμοις ἐπράχθη.
 ΚΑݲ Περὶ τοῦ Αἰγυπτίου, οὗ καὶ τῶν ἀποστόλων αἱ Πραξεῖς ἐμνημόνευσαν.
 ΚΒݲ Ὡς ἐκ τῆς Ἰουδαίας εἰς τὴν Ρώμην δέσμιος ἀναπεμφθεὶς Παᾶλος αὐλὸς ἀπολογησάμενος πάσης ἀπελύθη αἰτίας.
 ΚΓݲ Ὡς ἐμαρτύρησεν Ἰάκωβος ὁ τοῦ κυρίου χρηματίσας ἀδελφός.
 ΚΔݲ Ὡς μετὰ Μάρκον πρῶτος ἐπίσκοπος τῆς Ἀλεξανδρέων ἐκκΛησίας Ἀννιανὸς κατέστη.
 ΚΕݲ Περὶ τοῦ κατὰ Νέρωνα διωγμοῦ, καθ’ ὃν ἐπὶ Ρώμης Παῦλος καὶ Πέτρος τοῖς ὑπὲρ εὐσεβείας μαρτυρίοις κατεκοσμήθησαν.
 Κςݲ Ὡς μυρίοις κακοῖς περιηΛάθησαν Ἰουδαῖοι, καὶ ὡς τὸν ὕστατον πρὸς Ῥωμαίους ἤραντο πόλεμον.
 Συνῆκται ἡμῖν ἡ βίβλος ἀπὸ τῶν Κλήμεντος Τερτυλλιανοῦ Ἰωσήπου Φίλωνος.
 XIV.
 Οn the preachingof Peter the Apostle at Rome.
 XV.
 On the Gospel according to Mark.
 XVI.
 How Mark was the first to preach the knowledge of Christ to those in Egypt.
 XVII.
 The narrative of Philo on the Asceticsin Egypt.
 XVIII.
 The treatise of Philo which have come down to us.
 XIX.
 The misfortunes which overtook the Jews in Jerusalem on the day of the Passover.
 XX.
 What was done at Jerusalem under Nero.
 XXI.
 On the Egyptian whom the Acts oftheApostles also mentioned.
 XXII.
 How Paul was senta prisoner to Rome from Judaea and after defending himself was acquitted of all guilt.
 XXIII.
 How Jame who was called tbe brother of the Lord suffered martyrdom.
 XXIV.
 How after Μark Αnnianus was the first to be appointed bishop of the churehof the Alexandrians.
 XXV.
 On the persecutionunder Nero in which Ρaul and Peter at Rome were adorned with martyrdom for religion ' s sake.
 XXVI.
 How the Jews were pursued by countless evils and how they began the final war against the Romans.
 Our book was compiled fromthoseof Clement, Tertullian, Josephus, and Philo.
 II Οσα μὲν τῆς ἐκκλησιαστικῆς ἱστορίας ἐχρῆν ὡς ἐν προοιμίῳ διαστείλασθαι τῆς τε θεολογίας πέρι τοῦ σωτηρίου λόγου καὶ τῆς ἀρχαιολογίας τῶν τῆς ἡμετέρας διδασκαλίας δογμάτων ἀρχαιότητός τῆς κατὰ χριστιανοὺς εὐαγγελικῆς πολιτείας, οὐ μὴν ἀλλὰ καὶ ὅσα περὶ τῆς γενομένης ἔναγχος ἐπιφανείας αὐτοῦ, τά τε πρὸ τοῦ πάθους καὶ τὰ περὶ τῆς τῶν ἀποστόλων ἐκλογῆς, ἐν τῷ πρὸ τούτου, αυντεμόντες τὰς ἀποδείξεις, διειλήφαμεν·
 φέρε δ’, ἐπὶ τοῦ παρόντος ἤδη καὶ τὰ μετὰ τὴν ἀνάληψιν αὐτοῦ διασκεψώμεθα, τὰ μὲν ἐκ τῶν θείων παρασημαινόμενοι γραμμάτων, τὰδ’ ἔξωθεν προσιστοροῦντες ἐξ ὧν κατὰ καιρὸν μνημονεύσομεν ὑπομνημάτων.
 Ι.
 Πρῶτος τοιγαροῦν εἰς τὴν ἀποστολὴν ἀντὶ τοῦ προδότου Ἰούδα κληροῦται Ματθίας, εἷς καὶ αὐτός, ὡς δεδήλωται, τῶν τοῦ κυρίου γενόμενος μαθητῶν.
 καθίστανται δὲ δι’ εὐχῆς καὶ χειρῶν ἐπιθέσεως τῶν ἀποστόλων εἰς διακονίαν ἕνεκα τοῦ κοινοῦ ἄνδρες δεδοκιμασμένοι, τὸν ἀριθμὸν ἑπτά, οἱ ἀμφὶ τὸν Στέφανον.
 ὃς καὶ πρῶτος μετὰ τὸν κύριον ἅμα τῇ χειροτονίᾳ, ὥσπερ εἰς αὐτὸ τοῦτο προαχθείς, λίθοις εἰς θάνατον πρὸς τῶν κυριοκτόνων βάλλεται, καὶ ταύτῃ πρῷ·
 BΟΟK II ΑLL that needed stating by way of preface in the history ofthe Church-the proof of the divinity of the saving Logos, the ancient history οf our teaching, and the antiquity of the dogmas of the Christian life according to the Gospel, particularly allthepoints concerning hisreeently fuffilled advent, the events before his Passion, and the storyofthe choice oftheApostles— all this We traeedin preceding book, summarizing the demonstration.
 Let us now consider in the present book whatfolloWedhis Αscension, nothing some things fromthe divine writings, and adding whatis taken from other sources from treatises which We will quote from time to rime.
 I.
 Matthias was the first to be chosen to the Apostolate instead of the traitor Judas.
 As has beenshown, he had himself been one οf the Lord's disciples,For the administration of the commonfund tried men, seven in number, by Stephen, stephelb were appointed to the ministry by prayer and the on Of the Apostles' hands.
 And Stephen was first after his Lord notonlyin ordination, but,as though he had beenput forward forthis very purpose, also in thathe was stonedtodearil by the Lord's murderers,and so vasthe first to carry offthe crown, τος τὸν αὐτῷ φερώνυμον τῶν ἀξιονίκων τοῦ Χριστοῦ μαρτύρων ἀποφέρεται στέφανον.
 Τότε δῆτα καὶ Ἰάκωβον, τὸν τοῦ κυρίου λελόμενον ἀδελφόν, ὅτι δὴ καὶ οὗτος τοῦ Ἰωσὴφ ἐνόμαστο παῖς, τοῦ δὲ χριστοῦ πατὴρ ὁ Ἰωαήφ, ᾧ μνηστευθεῖσα ἡ παρθένος, πρὶν ἢ συνελθεῖν αὐτούς, εὑρέθη ἐν γαστρὶ ἔχουσα ἐκ πνεύματος ἁγίου, ὡς ἡ ἱερὰ τῶν εὐαγγελίων διδάσκει γραφή·
 τοῦτον δὴ οὖν αὐτὸν Ἰάκωβον, ὃν καὶ δίκαιον ἐπίκλην οἱ πάλαι δι’ ἀρετῆς ἐκάλουν προτερήματα, πρῶτον ἱστοροῦσιν τῆς ἐν ἐγχειρισθῆναι ἐκκλησίας τῆς ἐπισκοπῆς ἐγχειρισθῆναι θρόνον·
 Κλήμης ἐν ἕκτῳ τῶν Ὑποτυπώσεων γράφων ὧδε παρίστησιν“ Πέτρον γάρ φηαιν καὶ Ἰάκωβον καὶ Ἰωάννην μετὰ τὴν ἀνάληψιν τοῦ σωτῆρος, ὡς ἂν καὶ ὑπὸ τοῦ σωτῆρος προτετιμημένους, μὴ ἐπιδικάζεσθαι δόξης, ἀλλὰ Ἰάκωβον τὸν δίκαιον ἐπίσκοπον τῶν Ἱεροσολύμων ἐλέσθαι.
 ” ὁ δ’ αὐτὸς ἐν ἑβδόμῳ τῆς αὐτῆς ὑποθέσεως ἔτι καὶ ταῦτα περὶ αὐτοῦ φηαινἴ’ Ἰακώβῳ τῷ δικαίῳ καὶ Ἰωάννη καὶ Πέτρῳ μετὰ τὴν ἀνάστασιν παρέδωκεν τὴν γνῶσιν ὁ κύριος, οὗτοι τοῖς λοιποῖς ἀποστόλοις παρέδωκαν, οἱ δὲ λοιποὶ ἀπόστολοι τοῖς ἑβδομήκοντα·
 ὧν εἷς ἢν καὶ Βαρνάβας.
 δύο δὲ γεγόνασιν Ἰάκωβοι, εἷς ὁ δίκαιος, ὁ κατὰ τοῦ πτερυγίου βληθεὶς καὶ ὑπὸ γναφέως ξύλῳ πληγεὶς εἰς θάνατον, ἕτερος δὲ ὁ καρατομηθείς.
” Αὐτοῦ δὴ τοῦ δικαίου καὶ ὁ Παῦλος μνημονεύει γράφων“ ἕτερον δὲ τῶν ἀποστόλων οὐκ εἶδον, εἰ μὴ Ἰάκωβον τὸν ἀδελφὸν τοῦ κυρίου.
” Ἐν τούτοις καὶ τὰ τῆς τοῦ σωτῆρος ἡμῶν πρὸς τὸν τῶν Ὀσροηνῶν βασιλέα τέλος ἐλάμβανεν impliedbyhis name,1 whieh Was gained by the martyrsof Christ found worthy of Vietory.
 Αt that mme time alSo James, who was called the brother of the Lord.
 inasmuch as the latter too was styled the child of Joseph, and Joseph was called the father of Christ, for the Virgin Va betrOthed to him when, before lhey came together, she was discovered to have eoncebed by the Holy Spirit, as the Sacred writing of the Gospels teaches — this same James, to whomthe men Of old hadalso giVen the surname of Just fOr his excellence of Virtue, is’ ated to haVe been the first elected to the throne of the bishoprie of the Chureh in Jerusalem.
 Clement in the sixth book of the hypotyposes adducesthe following:
 “” he says,“ Peter and James and John after the AscensionOF the Saviour did not struggle for glory, beCause they had previously been given honourby the saViOur, but ehOe James the Just as bishop of”The same Writer in the seventh book of the same work says in additiOn thiS about him,“ Αfter the Resurrection the Lord gaVe the tradition of knowledge to James the Just and John and Ρeter, these gaVeit to the otherApostles and the other Apostles to the seventy, of whom Barnabas also was one.
 Now there Were tWo Jameses, one James the Just, whoa throwm down fromthe pinnacle of the templeand beaten to death witha fuller's club, and the other he who Was” Ρaul also mentionsthe same.
 James the Jurt when he writes,“ ΑndIsaw none other of the Apostles save James the brother of the Lord.
” Αt this timetoo the termsofOur saViOur’s promise to the king of the Osrhoense were receiving fulfil ὑποαχέαεως.
 ὁ γοῦν Θωμᾶς τὸν Θαδδαῖον κινήσει θειοτέρᾳ ἐπὶ τὰ Ἔδεσαα κήρυκα καὶ εὐαγγελιστὴν τῆς περὶ τοῦ λτριστοῦ διδασκαλίας ἐκπέμπει, ὡς ἀπὸ τῆς εὑρεθείσης αὐτόθι γραφῆς μικρῷ πρόσθεν ἐδηλώααμεν·
 ὁ δὲ τοῖς τόποις ἐπιστάς, τόν τε Ἄβγαρον ἰᾶται τῷ χριατοῦ λόγῳ καὶ τοὺς αὐτόθι πάντας τοῖς τῶν θαυμάτων παραδόξοις ἐκπλήττει, ἱκανῶς τε αὐτοὺς τοῖς ἔργοις διαθεὶς καὶ ἐπὶ αέβας ἀγαγὼν τῆς τοῦ χριατοῦ δυνάμεως, μαθητὰς τῆς σωτηρίου διδασκαλίας κατεστήαατο, εἰς ἔτι τε νῦν ἐξ ἐκείνου ἢ πᾶσα τῶν Ἐδεααηνῶν πόλις τῇ Χριατοῦ προσανάκειται προσηγορίᾳ, οὐ τὸ τυχὸν ἐπιφερομένη δεῖγμα τῆς τοῦ σωτῆρος ἡμῶν καὶ εἰς αὐτοὺς εὐεργεσίας.
 καὶ ταῦτα δ᾿ ὡς ἐξ ἀρχαίων ἱστορίας εἰρήαθω·
 μετίωμεν δ᾿ αὖθις ἐπὶ τὴν θείαν γραφήν.
 Γενομένου δῆτα ἐπὶ τῇ τοῦ Στεφάνου μαρτυρίᾳ πρώτου καὶ μεγίστου πρὸς αὐτῶν Ἰουδαίων κατὰ τῆς ἐν Ἱεροσολύμοις ἐκκλησίας διωγμοῦ πάντων τε τῶν μαθητῶν πλὴν ὅτι μόνων τῶν δώδεκα ἀνὰ τὴν Ἰουδαίαν τε καὶ Σαμάρειαν διααπαρέντων, τινὲς, ᾖ φηαιν ἢ θεία γραφή, διελθόντες ἕως Φοινίκης καὶ Κύπρου καὶ᾿ Ἀντιοχείας οὔπω μὲν ἔθνεσιν οἷοί τε ἦσαν τοῦ τῆς πίστεως μεταδιδόναι λόγου τολμᾶν, μόνοις δὲ τοῦτον Ἰουδαίοις κατήγγελλον.
 τηνικαῦτα καὶ Παῦλος ἐλυμαίνετο εἰς ἔτι τότε τὴν ἐκκλησίαν, κατ’ οἴκους τῶν πιστῶν εἰσπορευόμενος σύρων τε ἄνδρας καὶ γυναῖκας καὶ εἰς φυλακὴν παραδιδούς.
 ἀλλὰ καὶ Φίλιππος, εἷς τῶν ἅμα Στεφάνῳ προχειριαθέντων εἰς τὴν διακονίαν, ἐν τοῖς διασπαρεῖαιν γενόμενος, κάτειαιν εἰς τὴν Σαμάρειαν, ment.
 Thomas was divinelymoved to send Thaddaeus to Edessa as herald and evangelist of the teachingconcerning Christ,as we have shown Just previously from the writing preserved there.
 When he reached the place Thaddaeus healed Αbgar by the wordof Christ,and amazed all the inhabitants by hiS strange miracles.
 By the mighty inRuence of his deeds he brought them to reverence thepower of Christ, and made them disciples ofthe saving teaching.
 From that day to this the whole eity οf the Εdessenes has been dedicated 1 to thename of Christ, thus displayingno common proof of the benenceneeof our sariourto them.
 Let this suffice nom the history of the ancients and let us pass again to the divine scripture.
 On the martyrdom οf stephen there arose the Rrst and greatest persecutionofthe Church in Jerusalembythe Jews.
 Αll the diSeiples, with the single exception of the Twelve, were scattered throughout Judaea and Samaria;
 some, as the divine scripture sayS, traverSed asfaraS Ρhoenice,Cyprus and Αntioch, but they were not yet in a position to venture to transmit the word of faith to Gentiles, and announced it only to Jews.
 Αt that time Ρaul also was still ravagingthe Church, entering into the housesofthe faithful, dragging outmen and women, and handing them over to prison.
 Philiop, however, οne of thosewho with Stephenhad been already ordained to the diaconate, was among those who were seattered abroad, and went down to samaria, where, nlled with divine θείας τε ἔμπλεως δυνάμεως κηρύττει πρῶτος τοῖς αὐτόθι τὸν λόγον, τοσαύτη δ’ αὐτῷ θεία συνήργει χάρις, ὡς καὶ Σίμωνα τὸν μάγον μετὰ πλείστων ὅσων τοῖς αὐτοῦ λόγοις ἐλχθῆναι.
 ἐπὶ τοσοῦτον δ’ ὁ Σίμων βεβοημένος κατ’ ἐκεῖνο καιροῦ τῶν ἠπατημένων ἐκράτει γοητείᾳ, ὡς τὴν μεγάλην αὐτὸν ἡγεῖσθαι εἶναι δύναμιν τοῦ θεοῦ.
 τότεδ’ οὖν καὶ οὗτος τὰς ὑπὸ τοῦ φιλίππου δυνάμει θείᾳ τελουμένας καταπλαγεὶς παραδοξοποιίας, ὑποδύεται καὶ μέχρι λουτροῦ τὴν εἰς Χριστὸν πίστιν καθυποκρίνεται·
 ὃ καὶ θαυμάζειν ἄξιον εἰς δεῦρο γινόμενον πρὸς τῶν ἔτι καὶ νῦν τὴν ἀπ’ ἐκείνου μιαρωτάτην μετιόντων αἵρεσιν, οἳ τῇ τοῦ ἁφῶν προπάτορος μεθόδῳ τὴν ἐκκλησίαν λοιμώδους καὶ ψωραλέας νόσου δίκην ὑποδυόμενοι, τὰ μέγιστα λυμαίνονται τοὺς οἷς ἐναπομάξσαθαι οἷοί τε ἂν εἶεν τὸν ἐν αὐτοῖς ἀποκεκρυμμένον δυσαλθῆ καὶ χαλεπὸν ἰόν.
 ἤδη γέ τοι πλείους τούτων ἀπεώσθησαν, ὁποῖοί τινες εἶεν τὴν μοχθηρίαν ἁλόντες, ὥσπερ οὖν καὶ ὁ Σίμων αὐτὸς πρὸς τοῦ Πέτρου καταφωραθεὶς ὃς ἢν, τὴν προσήκουσαν ἔτισεν τιμωρίαν.
 ἀλλὰ γὰρ εἰς αὔξην ὁσημέραι προἰ·
 όντος τοῦ σωτηρίου κηρύγματος, οἰκονομία τις ἦγεν ἀπὸ τῆς γῆς τῆς αὐτόθι βσαιλίδος, κατά τι πάτριον ἔθος ὑπὸ γυναικὸς τοῦ ἔθνους εἰς ἔτι νῦν βασιλευομένου, δυνάστην·
 ὃν πρῶτον ἐξ ἐθνῶν πρὸς τοῦ Φιλίππου δι’ ἐπιφανείας τὰ τοῦ θείου λόγου ὄργια μετασχόντα τῶν τε ἀνὰ τὴν οἰκουμένην πιστῶν ἀπαρχὴν γενόμενον, πρῶτον κατέχει λόγος ἐπὶ τὴν πάτριον παλινοστήσαντα γῆν εὐαγγελίσασθαι τὴν τοῦ τῶν θεοῦ θεοῦ γνῶσιν καὶ τὴν power, he wasthe Rrst to preaehthe word to those there.
 So great wasthegrace of Ood,which worked with him, that even simon Magus, with countleSs others, was captivated by his wordS.
 Αt that time Simo had obtained such fame by his magical power over his victims that he was held to be the Oreat Ρower of God;
 but even he waS then so overwhelmed by the marvels wrought by Philiop by divine power, that he submitted, and feigned faith in ChriSt even to the point οf baptism.
 It is worthy of wonder that this is still done by those who continue hiS moSt unelean heresy to the Ρresent day, for following the method of their Ρrogenitor they attach themselves to the Church likea pestilential and scurfy disease, and ravage to the utmost all Whom they are able to inoculate with the deadly and terrible poison hidden in them.
 Μost of theSe, however, have alreadybeen driven out,as many as have been detectedin their wickedneSs, just as simon himself, when his real nature was detected by Ρeter, paid the proper punishment.
 While the saving was daily progressing and growing, Some Ρrovidence brought from the land of the Εthiopians an officer ofthe queen of that land,for the nation, following ancestral eustoms, is Still ruled bya woman.
 Tradition says that he, who was the Rrst of the Oentiles to receive from Philip by revelation the mysteriesofthe ffivine word, and was the nrst- fruits of the faithfulthroughoutthe world, waS also the RrSt to return to his native land and preach the OoSpel οf the knowledge οfthe Ood ofthe univerSe andthe sojourn οf our εἰς ἀνθρώπους τοῦ σωτῆρος ἡμῶν ἐπιδημίαν, ἔργῳ πληρωθείσης δι’ αὐτοῦ τῆς ἐπιδημίαν, προφθάσει χεῖρα αὐτῆς τῷ θεῷ’’ περιεχούσης προφητείας.
 ἐπὶ τούτοις Παῦλος, τὸ τῆς ἐκλογῆς σκεῦος, οὐκ ἐξ ἀνθρώπων οὐδὲ δι’ ἀνθρώπων, δι’ ἀπολαλύψεωςδ’ αὐτοῦ Ἰησοῦ χριστοῦ καὶ θεοῦ πατρὸς τοῦ ἐγείραντος αὐτὸν ἐκ νεκρῶν, ἀπόστολος ἀναδείκνυται, δι’ ὀπτασίας καὶ τῆς κατὰ τὴν ἀπολάλυψιν οὐρανίου φωνῆς ἀξιωθεὶς τῆς κλήσεως.
 II.
 Καὶ δὴ τῆς παραδόξου τοῦ σωτῆρος ἡμῶν ἀναστάσεώς τε καὶ εἰς οὐρανοὺς ἀναλήψεως τοῖς πλείστοις ἤδη περιβοήτου καθεστώσης, παλαιοῦ κεκρατηκότος ἔθους τοῖς τῶν ἐθνῶν ἄρχουσι τὰ παρὰ αψίσιν καινοτομούμενα τῷ τὴν βασίλειον ἀρχὴν ἐπικρατοῦντι αημαίνειν, ὡς ἄν μηδὲν αὐτὸν δισδιδράσκοι τῶν γινομένων, τὰ περὶ τῆς ἐκ νεκρῶν ἀναστάσεως τοῦ σωτῆρος ἡμῶν Ἰησοῦ εἰς πάντας ἤδη καθ’ ὅλης Παλαιστίνης Πιλᾶτος Τιβερίῳ βασιλεῖ κοινοῦται, τάς τε ἄλλας αὐτοῦ πυθόμενος εραστίας καὶ ὡς ὅτι μετὰ θάνατον ἐκ νεκρῶν ἀναστὰς ἤδη θεὸς εἶναι παρὰ τοῖς πολλοῖς πεπίστευτο.
 τὸν δὲ Τιβέριον ἀνενεγκεῖν ἐπὶ τὴν σύγκλητον ἐκείνηντ’ ἀπώσασθαί φασι τὸν λόγον, τῷ μὲν δοκεῖν, ὅτι μὴ πρό.
 τερον αὐτὴ τοῦτο δοκιμάσασα ἢν, παλαιοῦ νόμου κεκρατηκότος μὴ ἄλλως τινὰ παρὰ Ῥωμαίοις θεοποιεῖσθαι μὴ οὐχὶ ψήφῳ καὶ δόγματι συγκλήτου, τῆδ’ ἀληθείᾳ, ὅτι μηδὲ τῆς ἐξ ἀνθρώπων ἐπικρίσεώς τε καὶ συστάσεως ἡ σωτήριος τοῦ θείου κηρύγματος ἐδεῖτο διδασκαλία·
 ταύτῃ δ’ οὖν ἀπωσαμένης τὸν προσαγγελθέντα περὶ τοῦ Saviour which gives life to men, so that by him was actuauy fulmled the porphecy which sa ys,“ Εthiοpia shall stretch out her hand to” In additionto these Paul, the chosen vessel neither of men nor through men but through revelation of Jesus christ himself and God the Father who raised him from the dead, was appointed an Αpostle, being vouchsafed this calling by a rision and the heavenly voice οf revelation.
 II.
 The wonderful resurrection and ascension into heavcn of our Saviourwasnowalready generally famous, and in accordance with an ancient eustom that those who were ruling οver the nations should report to him who held the imperial office any new movement among them, in οrder that no event might escape his notiee, Pilate communicated to the Εmperor Tiberius the story of the resurrection from the dead of our Saviour Jesus as already famous aInong all throughout all Palestine, together with the information he had gained of his οther wonders and how he was aheady believed by many to bea God,in that after death he had risen from the deasd.
 1 They say that Tiberius referredthe report to the senate, which rejected it ostensibly becauseithad not preriouslytestedthe matter,for an ancientlaw prevailed thatno οne shouldbe held asa God by the Romans exeept by a vote and decree of the senate, but in truth because the saving teaching of the divine message needed no ratification and commendation from men.
 In this waythe council of σωτῆρος ἡμῶν λόγον τῆς Ῥωμαίων βουλῆς, τὸν Τιβέριον ἢν καὶ πρότερον εἶχεν γνώμην τηρήσαντα, μηδὲν ἄτοπον κατὰ τῆς τοῦ χριοτοῦ διδασκαλίας ἐπινοῆσαι.
 Ταῦτα Τερτυλλιανὸς τοὺς Ῥωμαίων νόμους ἠκριβωκώς, ἀνὴρ τά τε ἄλλα ἔνδοξος καὶ τῶν μάλιστα ἐπὶ Ῥώμης λαμπρῶν, ἐν τῇ γραφείσῃ μὲν αὐτῷ‘ Ρωμαίων φωνῇ, μεταβληθείσῃδ’ ἐπὶ τὴν Ἑλλάδα γλῶτταν ὑπὲρ χριστιανῶν ἀπολογίᾳ τίθησιν, κατὰ λέξιν τοῦτον ἱστορῶν τὸν τρόπον“ ἵνα δὲ καὶ ἐκ τῆς γενέσεως διαλεχθῶμεν τῶν τοιούτων νόμων, παλαιὸν ἢν δόγμα μηδένα θεὸν ὑπὸ βασιλέως καθιεροῦσθαι, πρὶν ὑπὸ τῆς συγκλήτου Μάρκος Αἰμίλιος οὕτως περί τινος εἰδώλου πεποίηκεν Ἀλβούρονυ.
 καὶ τοῦτο ὑπὲρ τοῦ ἡμῶν λόγου πεποίηται, ὅτι παρ’ ὑμῖν ἀνθρωπείᾳ δοκιμὴ ἡ θεότης δίδοται.
 ἐὰν μὴ ἀνθρώπῳ θεὸς ἀρέσῃ, θεὸς οὐ γίνεται·
 οὕτως κατά γε τοῦτο ἄνθρωπον θεῷ ἵλεω εἶναι προσῆκεν.
 Τιβέριος οὖν, ἐφ’ οὗ τὸ τῶν χριστιανῶν ὄνομα εἰς τὸν κόσμον εἰσελήλυθεν, ἀγγελθέντος αὐτῷ ἐκ παλαιστίνης τοῦ δόγματος τούτου, ἔνθα πρῶτον ἤρξατο, τῆ συγκλήτῳ ἀνεκοινώσατο, δῆλος ὢν ἐκείνοις ὡς τῷ δόγματι ἀρέσκεται.
 ἡ δὲ σύγκλητος ἐπεὶ οὐκ αὐτὴ δεδοκιμάκει, ἀπώσατο·
 ὁ δὲ ἐν τῆ αὐτοῦ ἀποφάσει ἔμεινεν, ἐπελήσας θάνατον τοῖς τῶν Χριστισνῶν κατηγόροις.
 Τῆς οὐρανίου προνοίας κατ’ οἰκονομίαν τοῦτ’ αὐτῷ πρὸς νοῦν βαλλομένης, ὡς ἂν ἀπαραποδίστως ἀρχὰς ἔχων ὁ τοῦ εὐαγγελίου λόγος πανταχόσε γῆς διαδράμοι.
 ΙΙΙ.
 Οὕτω δῆτα οὐρανίῳ δυνάμει καὶ συνεργίᾳ the Romans rejected the report sent to it concerning οur sariour, but Tiberius kept the opinion which he had fonnerly held and made no wicked plans against the teaching οf Christ.
 Tertullian, who had an accurate knowledge of Roman law,a man espeeially famous among those most distinguished in Rome, has noted this in the Apology for the christians which was written by him in Latin but translated into the oreek language;
 he tells the story as follows:
“ But, in order that we may ffiscuss sueh laws from their origin, there an an ancient decree that none should be con- secrated asa god by an Εmperor before being approved by the senate.
 Marcus Aemilius has acted thus conceminga certain idol Αlbumus.
 Αnd this supports our argument that among you godship has been given by human approval.
 If a god does not Ρlease man, he does not hecome god, so that, according to this, man must be gracious to Ood.
 Tiberius, therefore,in whose time the name of Christian came into the World, when this doctrine was reported tohim from Ρalestine, where it Rrst began, communh cated ittothe Senate,and made it plain to them that hefavouredthe doctrine,but the senate, because it had not itself testedit, rejected it;
 but he continued in his own opinion and threatened death to the accusers of the” 1 For heavenly providence had designed putting this in his mind in order that the word of the Oospel might have an unimpeded beginning, and traverse the earth in all directions.
 III.
 Thus by the power and assistance of Ηeaven ἀθρόως οἷά τις ἡλίου βολὴ τὴν σύμπασαν οἰκουμένην ὁ σωτήριος κατηύγαζε λόγος.
 αὐτίκα ταῖς θείαις ἑπομένως γραφαῖς ἐπὶ“ πᾶσαν’’ προῄει“ τὴν γῆν ὁ φθόγγος’’ τῶν θεσπεσίων εὐαγγελιστῶν αὐτοῦ καὶ ἀποστόλων,“ καὶ εἰς τὰ πέρατα τῆς οἰκουμένης τὰ ῥήματα αὐτῶν.
” καὶ δῆτα ἀνὰ πάσας πόλεις τε καὶ κώμας, πληθυούσης ἅλωνος δίκην, μυρίανδροι καὶ παμπληθεῖς ἀθρόως ἐκκλησίαι συνεστήκεσαν, οἵ τε ἐκ προγόνων διαδοχῆς καὶ τῆς ἀνέκαθεν πλάνης παλαιῷ νόσῳ δεισιδαιμονίας εἰδώλων τὰς Ψυχὰς πεπεδημένοι, πρὸς τῆς τοῦ χριστοῦ δυνάμεως διὰ τῆς τῶν φοιτητῶν αὐτοῦ διδασκαλίας τε ὁμοῦ καὶ παραδοξοποιίας ὥσπερ δεινῶν δεινῶν ἀπηλλαγμένοι εἱργμῶν τε χαλεπωτάτων λύαιν εὑράμενοι, πάσης μὲν δαιμονικῆς κατέπτυον πολυθεΐας, ἕνα δὲ μόνον εἶναι θεὸν ὡμολόγουν, τὸν τῶν αυμπάντων δημιουργόν, τοῦτόν τε αὐτὸν θεσμοῖς ἀληθοῦς εὐσεβείας δι’ ἐνθέου καὶ αώφρονος θρησκείας τῆς ὑπὸ τοῦ σωτῆρος ἡμῶν τῷ τῶν ἀνθρώπων βίῳ κατασπαρείσης ἐγέραιρον.
 ἀλλὰ γὰρ τῆς χάριτος ἤδη τῆς θείας καὶ ἐπὶ τὰ λοιπὰ χεομένης ἔθνη καὶ πρώτου μὲν κατὰ τὴν Παλαιστίνων Καισάρειαν Κορνηλίου αὺν ὅλῳ τῷ οἴκῳ δι’ ἐπιφανείας θειοτέρας ὑπουργίας τε Πέτρου τὴν εἰς Χριστὸν πίστιν καταδεξαμένου πλείστων τε καὶ ἄλλων ἐπ’ Ἀντιοχείας Ἑλλήνων, οἷς κατὰ τὸν Στεφάνου διωγμὸν διασπαρέντες ἐκήρυξαν, ἀνθούσης ἄρτι καὶ πληθυούσης τῆς κατὰ Ἀωτιόχειαν ἐκκλησίας ἐν ταὐτῷ τε ἐπιπαρόντων πλείστων τῶν τε ἀπὸ Ἱεροσολύμων προφητῶν καὶ αὺν αὐτοῖς Βαρνάβα καὶ Παύλου ἑτέρου τε the saving word began to flood the whole world with light like the rays of the sun.
 Αt once, in accordance with the divine Scriptures, the voice οf its inspired evangelists and Apostles“ Went forth to the whole earth and their words to the end of the” In every eity and rillage arose churehes crowded with thousands of men, like a teeming threshing- floor.
 Those who by hereditary succession and original error had their souls bound by the ancientdiseaseοf the superstition of idols were set free as if from Rerce maSters and found release from fearful bondage by the power οf Christ throughthe teaching of his followers and their wonderful deeds.
 They rejected all the polytheismof the demons, and confessed that there is οnly one God, the Creatorof the universe.
 Ηim they honoured with the rites of true piety by the ffirine and rational worship which was implanted by οur saviour in the life of men.
 But indeed it was when the grace of Ood was already being poured out even οn the other nations— when faith in Christ had been received, nrSt by Cornelius with all his house in Ρalestinian Caesarea through divine mani- festation and the ministration of Ρeter, and also by many οther Oreeks in Αntioch, to whom those preached who had been Scattered in the persecution about stephen, and the Chureh in Αntiοch was already flourishing and multiplying— it was at that moment and in that place, when So many of the prophets from Jerusalem were also present, and with them Barnabas and Paul, and a number of the other πλήθους ἐπὶ τούτοις ἀδελφῶν, ἡ Χριστιανπῶν προσηγορία τότε πρῶτον αὐτόθι ὥσπερ ἀπ’ εὐθάλους καὶ γονίμου πηγῆς ἀναδίδοται.
 καὶ Ἄγαβος μέν, εἷς τῶν συνόντων αὐτοῖς προφητῶν, περὶ τοῦ μέλλειν ἔσεσθαι λιμὸν προθεσπίζει, Παῦλος δὲ καὶ Βαρναβᾶς ἐξυπηρετησόμενοι τῇ τῶν ἀδελφῶν παραπέμπονται διακονίᾳ.
 IV.
 Τιβέριος μὲν οὖν ἀμφὶ τὰ δύο καὶ εἴκοσι βασιλεύσας1 ἔτη τελευτᾷ, μέτα δὲ τοῦτον Γάϊος τὴν τὴν ἡγεμονίαν παραλαβών, αὐτίκα τῆς Ἰουδαίων ἀρχῆς Ἀγρίππᾳ τὸ διάδημα περιτίθησιν, βασικέα καταστήσας αὐτὸν τῆς τε Φιλίππου καὶ τῆς Λυσανίου τετραρχίας, πρὸς αἷς μετ’ οὐ πολὺν αὐτῷ χρόνον καὶ τὴν Ἠρῴδου τετραρχίαν παραδίδωσιν, ἀϊδίῳ φυγῇ τὸν Ἡρῴδην( οὗτος δ᾿ ἦν ὁ κατὰ τὸ πάθος τοῦ σωτῆρος) σὺν καὶ τῇ γυναικὶ Ἡρῳδιάδι πλείστων ἕνεκα ζημιώσας αἰτιῶν.
 μάρτυς Ἰώσηπος καὶ τούτων.
 Κατὰ δὴ τοῦτον Φίλων ἐγνωρίζετο πλείστοις, ἀνὴρ οὐ μόνον τῶν ἡμετέρων, ἀλλὰ καὶ τῶν ἀπὸ τῆς ἔξωθεν ὁρμωμένων παιδείας ἐπισημότατος.
 τὸ μὲν οὖν γένος ἀνέκαθεν Ἑβραῖος ἢν, τῶν δ᾿ ἐπ’ Ἀλεξανδρείας ἐν τέλει διαφανῶν οὐδενὸς χείρων, περὶ δὲ τὰ θεῖα καὶ πάτρια μαθήματα ὅσον τε καὶ ὁπηλίκον εἰσενήνεκται πόνον, ἔργῳ πᾶσι δῆλος, καὶ περὶ τὰ φιλόσοφα δὲ καὶ ἐλευθέρια τῆς ἔξωθεν παιδείας οἷός τις ἢν, οὐδὲν δεῖ λέγειν, ὅτε μάλιστα τὴν κατὰ Πλάτωνα καὶ Πυθαγόραν ἐζηλωκὼς ἀγωγήν, διενεγκεῖν ἅπαντας τοὺς καθ’ ἑαυτὸν ἱστορεῖται.
 V.
 καὶ δὴ τὰ 1 κατὰ Γάϊον οὗτος Ἰουδαίοις συμβάντα πέντε βιβλίοις παραδίδωσιν, ὁμοῦ τὴν Γαΐου διεξιὼν brethren besides them, that the name of Chrirtian was nrst given, as froma fresh and life- givning fountain.
 Agabus also, one ofthe Ρrοphets with them, made preffictions that there waS to bea famine,and Ρaul andBarnabas were sent to give assistance to the ministry οf the brethren.
 IV.
 Tiberius ffied after reigning about twenty- two years.
 1 Αfter him Caius received the sovereignty and at once gaveto Αgrippa2the crown of the rule of the Jews.
 Ηe made him king of the tetrarchies οf Philip and LysaniaS, and aftera short time added to them the tetrarchy of Ηerod, Sentencing Ηerod( he wastheΗerοd of the Ρassion ofthe saviour)for many offencestoperpetual banishment, together with his wife Herodias.
 Οf tffihls too Josephusis witness.
 In his reign Ρhilo beeame generally known asa man of the greatestdistiction, not only amongour own peoplebutalso among thoseof heathen educa- tion.
 Ηe wasaΗebrew by racial descentbut in- ferior to none οf the magnates in authority in Alexandria.
 The extent and quality οf the labour he bestowed οn the theologieal learning of hiS raee is in fact patentto all, and it is not necessary to say anything of his position in philosophy and the liberal stuffies of the heathen world since he is related to have surpassed all his contemporaries, especially inhis zeal for the study οf Ρlato and Ρythagoras.
 V.
 Νοw this wTiter has narrated in Rve books what happened to the Jews ìn the time of Caius;
 he has in thiswork combined the Stories ortheinsanity ofCaius, φρενοβλάβειαν, ὡς θεὸν ἑαυτὸν ἀναγορεύσαντος καὶ μυρία περὶ τὴν ἀρχὴν ἐνυβρικότος, τάς τε κατ’ αὐτὸν Ἰουδαίων ταλαιπωρίας καὶ ἢν αὐτὸς στειλάμενος ἐπὶ τῆς Ῥωμαίων πόλεως ὑπὲρ κατὰ τὴν Ἀλεξάνδρειαν ὁμοεθνῶν ἐποιήσατο πρεσβείαν, ὅπως τε ἐπὶ τοῦ Γαΐου καταστὰς ὑπὲρ τῶν πατρίων νόμων, οὐδέν τι πλέον γέλωτος καὶ διασυρμῶν ἀπηνέγκατο, μικροῦ δεῖν καὶ τὸν περὶ τῆς ζωῆς ἀνατλὰς κίνδυνον.
 Μέμνηται καὶ τούτων ὁ Ἰώσηπος, ἐν ὀκτὼ.
 καιδεκάτῳ τῆς Ἀρχαιολογίας κατὰ λέξιν ταῦτα γράφων“ καὶ δὴ στάσεως ἐν Ἀλεξανδρεία γενο- μένης Ἰουδαίων τε οἳ ἐνοικοῦσι, καὶ Ἑλλήνων, τρεῖς ἀφ’ ἑκατέρας τῆς στάσεως πρεσβευταὶ αἱρεθέντες παρῆσαν πρὸς τὸν Γάϊον.
 καὶ ἦν γὰρ τῶν Ἀλεξανοδρέων πρέσβεων εἷς Ἀπίων, ὃς πολλὰ εἰς τοὺς Ἰουδαίους ἐβλασφήμησεν, ἄλλα τε λέγων καὶ ὡς τῶν Καίσαρος τιμῶν περιορῷεν·
 πάντων γοῦν, ὅσοι τῆ Ῥωμαίων ἀρχῇ ὑποτελεῖς εἶεν, βωμοὺς τῷ γαίῳ καὶ ναοὺς ἱδρυμένων τά τε ἄλλα ἐν πᾶσιν αὐτὸν ὥσπερ τοὺς θεοὺς δεχομένων, τούσδε τούσδε ἄδοξον ἡμεῖσθαι ἀνδριᾶσι τιμᾶν καὶ ὅρκιον αὐτοῦ τὸ ὄνομα ποιεῖσθαι·
 πολλὰ δὲ καὶχαλεπὰ Ἀπίωνος εἰρηκότος, ὑφ’ ὧν ἀρθῆναι ἤλπιζεν τὸν Γάϊον καὶ εἰκὸς ἢν, Φίλων ὁ προεστὼς τῶν Ἰουδαίων τῆς πρεσβείας, ἀνὴρ τὰ πάντα ἔνδοξος Ἀλεξάνδρου τε τοῦ ἀλαβάρχου ἀδελφὸς ὢν καὶ φιλοσοφίας οὐκ ἄπειρος, οἷός τε ἢν ἐπ’ ἀπολογίᾳ χωρεῖν τῶν κατηγορημένων, διακλείειδ’ αὐτὸν Γάϊος, κελεύσας ἐκποδὼν ἀπελθεῖν, περιοργής τε ὢν φανερὸς ἢν ἐργασόμενός τι δεινὸν αὐτούς.
 ὁ δὲ Φίλων ἔξεισι πέρι- how he announeed himself asa god and perpetrated innumerable aets of insolence duringhis reign,of the misery of the Jevsinhis time, of the mission which he vas himself elrtrusted to make to tbe city or tbe Romans on behalf of those of his own race in Alexandria, and or how, When he appeared before Caius on behalf of his ancestral lavs, he reeeiVed nothing but laughter and ridicule, and narrowly eseaped risking his life.
 Josephus also relates these facts and writes as follows in the eighteenth book of the Antiquities;
“ Now Whena disturbance took place in Alexandria between the Jews who lived there and the Greeks, three of each side were chosen to to as representative to Caius.
 Οne of the Alexandrian representativeswas Αpion,Who uttered many calumnies against the Jews, saying especially that they neglected to give honourto Caesar,and that whileallwho are subject to tbe rule of the Romans build altars and templesot Caius, and in other respects reeeive hinl tb they do the gods, these men alone think it improper to honour him with statues or to swearby his name.
 Now thought Apion had made many serious charges by whieh he naturally hoped that Caiu, wouldbe roued, Philo, the chief of the embassy of the Jew,a man of highreputationin every respectfor he wasthebrother of Alexanderthe Alabarch anda philosopher ofno little skill, was able in his reply to deal with the accusations but Caius cut him short, bade him get out of the way, and was so enraged that he clearly was on the point or serious measures against them.
 So Philo went ὑβρισμένος, καί φησιν πρὸς τοὺς Ἰουδαίους οἳ περὶ αὐτὸν ἦααν, ὡς χρὴ θαρρεῖν, Γαίου μὲν αὐτοῖς ὠργιαμένου, ἔργῳ δὲ ἤδη τὸν θεὸν ἀντὶ·
 παρεξάγοντος.
 ” Ταῦτα ὁ Ἰώσηπος.
 καὶ αὐτὸς δὲ ὁ Φίλων ad Gai.
 24.
 38 ἐν ἧ συνέραψεν Πρεσβείᾳ τὰ κατὰ μέρος ἀκριβῶς τῶν τότε πραχθέντων αὐτῷ δηλοῖ, ὧν τὰ πλεῖστα παρείς, ἐκεῖνα μόνα παραθήσομαι, δι’ ὧν τοῖς ἐντυγχάνουσι προφανὴς γενήσεται δήλωσις τῶν ἅμα τε καὶ οὐκ εἰς μακρὸν τῶν κατὰ τοῦ Χριστοῦ τετολμημένων ἕνεκεν Ἰουδαίοις συμβεβηκότων.
 πρῶτον δὴ οὗν κατὰ Τιβέριον ἐπὶ μὲν τῆς Ῥωμαίων πόλεως Σηιανόν, τῶν τότε παρὰ βασιλεῖ πολλὰ δυνάμενον, ἄρδην τὸ πᾶν ἔθνος ἀπολέσθαι σπουδὴν εἰσαγηοχέναι, ἐπὶ δὲ τῆς Ἰουδαίας πιλᾶτον, καθ’ ὃν τὰ περὶ τὸν σωτῆρα τετόλμητο, περὶ τὸ ἐν Ἱεροσολύμοις ἔτι τότε συνεστὸς ἱερὸν ἐπιχειρήσαντά τι παρὰ τὸ Ἰουδαίοις ἐξόν, τὰ μέγιστα αὐτοὺς ἀναταράξαι, VI.
 μετὰ δὲ τὴν Τιβερίου τελευτὴν Γάϊον τὴν ἀρχὴν παρειληφότα, πολλὰ μὲν εἰς πολλοὺς καὶ ὤα ἐνυβρίσαι, πάντων δὲ μάλιστα τὸ πᾶν Ἰουδαίων ἔθνος οὐ σμικρὰ καταβλάψαι·
 ἃ καὶ ἐν βραχεῖ πάρεστιν διὰ τῶν αὐτοῦ καταμαθεῖν φωνῶν, ἐν αἷς κατὰ λέξιν ταῦτα γράφει“ Τοσαύτη μὲν οὖν τις ἡ τοῦ Γαίου περὶ τὸ ἦθος ἦν ἀνωμαλία πρὸς ἅπαντας, διαφερόντως δὲ πρὸς τὸ Ἰουδαίων γένος, ᾧ χαλεπῶς ἀπ’·
 εχθανόμενος τὰς μὲν ἐν ταῖς ἄλλαις πόλεσιν προσευχάς, ἀπὸ τῶν κατ’ Ἀλεξάνδρειαν ἀρξάμενος, σφετερίζεται, καταπλήσας εἰκόνων καὶ ἀνδριάντων τῆς ἰδίας μορφῆς ὁ γὰρ ἑτέρων ἀνατιθέντων out, deeply insulted, and told thethe who were with him that they must keepup their courage, for though Caius was enraged agailbt them he was in fact already fighting against God.
” So far Josephus.
 Philo himself in the Embassy which he Wrote gives an accurate and detailed aecount of what he did at the timeΙ shall Ρass over the greater Ρart and eite Only those points whieh plainly demonstrate to students the misfortunes whieh eame upon the Jews, all at once and aftera rilort time, in consequeneeOf their crimes against Christ.
 In the ffist Ρlacehe relate that, in thetimeOf Tiberius,in the city ofthe Romans, Sejanus,the most influential of the Emperor's court atthe time, took measures eompletely to destroy the whole race, andin Judaea Ρilate, under whom the crime against the saviour was perpetrated, made an attempton the temple, still standingin Jerusalem, contrary to the privileges granted to the JeWs, and harassed themtO the utmost,( VI.
) whhe arter the death Of Tiberius Caius reeeived the sovereignty and inffieted many injuries on many, but morethan all didthegreatest harm tothevhole nation of the Jews.
 This may be learned shOrtly from his own word, in which he writes exactly as follows:
“ Now the eharaeter of Caius vas extremely capricious towards all, but particularly towards the raeeof Jews.
 Ηe hated them bitteriy bitterly:
 in other cities, beginning with Alexandria, he seized the synagogues and ffiled them vith images and statues of his own form( for by giving permission to ἐφιείς, αὐτὸς ἱδρύετο δυνάμει), τὸνδ’ ἐν τῇ ἱεροπόλει νεών, ὃς λοιπὸς ἢν ἄψαυστος, ἀσυλίας ἠξιωμένος τῆς πάσης, μεθηρμόζετο καὶ μετεσχημάτιζεν εἰς οἰκεῖον ἱερόν, ἵνα Δῖός Ἐπιφανοῦ Νέου χρηματίζῃ Γαΐου.
” Μυρία μὲν οὖν ἄλλα δεινὰ καὶ πέρα πάσης διηγήσεως ὁ αὐτὸς κατὰ τὴν Ἀλεξάνδρειαν αυμβεβηκότα Ἰουδαίοις ἐπὶ τοῦ δηλουμένου ἐν δευτέρῳ αυγγράμματιξ ᾧ1 ἐπέγραφεν“ Περὶ ἀρετῶν” ἱστορεῖ·
 συνᾴδει δ’ αὐτῷ καὶ ὁ Ἰώσηπος, ὁμοίως ἀπὸ τῶν Πιλάτου χρόνων καὶ τῶν κατὰ τοῦ σωτῆρος τετολμημένων τὰς κατὰ παντὸς τοῦ ἔθνους ἐνάρξασθαι αημαίνων συμφοράς.
 δ’ οὖν οἷα καὶ οὗτος ἐν δευτέρῳ τοῦ Ἰουδαϊκοῦ πολέμου αὐταῖς συλλαβαῖς δηλοῖ λέγων“ Πεμφθεὶς δὲ εἰς Ἰουδαίαν ἐπίτροπος ὑπὸ2, 169 Τιβερίου Πιλᾶτος νύκτωρ κεκαλυμμένας εἰς Ἱεροσόλυμα παρεισκομίζει τὰς Καίσαρος εἰκόνας·
 σημαῖας καλοῦνται.
 τοῦτο μεθ’ ἡμέραν μεγίστην ταραχὴν ἤγειρεν τοῖς Ἰουδαίοις.
 οἵ τε γὰρ ἐγγὺς πρὸς τὴν ὄφιν ἐξεπλάγησαν, ὡς πεπατημένων τῶν νόμων·
 οὐδὲν γὰρ ἀξιοῦσιν ἐν τῆ πόλει δείκηλον τίθεσθαι.
” Ταῦτα δὲ συγκρίνας τῇ τῶν εὐαγγελίων γραφῆ, εἴσῃ ὡς οὐκ εἰς μακρὸν αὐτοὺς μετῆλθεν ἢν ἔρρηξαν ἐπ’ αὐτοῦ Πιλάτου φωνήν, δι’ ἦς οὐκ ἄλλον ἢ μόνον ἔχειν ἐπεβόων Καίσαρα βασιλέα.
 other to install them he did in fact put them there).
 and in Jerusalem the temple, which had hithterto beeen untouched and held worthy of preservation from all violation,he tried to change and transform toa shrine of his own to be called that off‘ Gaius the new Zeus manifest.
 '” The same writer narrates ina second treaties entitled Οn the Virtues1 innumerable other atrocities, beyond all description, perpectrated on Jews in Alexandria in the same reign, and Josephus comfirms him, showing in the same Way that rile universal misfortunes of the nation began with the time οf Pilate and the crimes against the Saviour.
 Listen then to the actural words of his statement in the second book of the Jewish War.
“ Now Pilate.
 sent as procurator to Judaea by Tiberius, brought into Jerusalem at night and covered up the images of Caesar which are called ensigns.
 When day came this roused the greatest commotion amongthe Jews, for they were horrified at what theysaw close by since their laws had been trampled om, for they do not permit any image to be set up in the city.
” Now comparing this with the writing of the Gospels you will see that it was not long before they Were overtaken by the ery vhieh they uttered in the presenceof Pilate himself, with Which they rilOuted Out that they had no other king than Caesar only.
 The same writer εἶτα δὲ καὶ ἄλλην ἑξῆς ὁ αὐτὸς αυγγραξεὺς ἱστορεῖ μετελθεῖν αὐτοὺς συμφορὰν ἐν τούτοις“ μετὰ δὲ ταῦτα ταραχὴν ἑτέραν ἐκίνει, τὸν ἱερὸν θησαυρὸν, καλεῖται’ δε κορβανᾶς, εἰς καταγωγὴν ὑδάτων ἐξαναλίσκων·
 κατῄει δὲ ἀπὸ τριακοσίων σταδίων.
 πρὸς τοῦτο τοῦ πλήθους ἀγανάκτησις ἢν, καὶ τοῦ Πιλάτου παρόντος εἰς ἀγανάκτησις περιατάντες ἅμα κατεβόων.
 ὁ δὲ προῄδει γὰρ αὐτῶν τὴν ταραχὴν καὶ τῷ πλήθει τοὺς στρατιώτας ἐνόπλους, ἐσθήσεσιν ἰδιωτικαῖς κεκαλυμμένους, ἐγκαταμίξας καὶ ξίφει μὲν χρήσασθαι κωλύσας, ξύλοις δὲ παίειν τοὺς κεκραγότας ἐγκελευσάμενος, αύνθημα δίδωαιν ἀπὸ τοῦ βήματος.
 τυπτόμενοι δὲ οἱ Ἰουδαῖοι πολλοὶ μὲν ὑπὸ τῶν πληγῶν, πολλοὶ δὲ ὑπὸ σφῶν αὐτῶν ἐν τῇ φυγῇ καταπατηθέντες ἀπώλοντο, πρὸς δὲ τὴν συμφορὰν τῶν ἀνηρημένων καταπλαγὲν τὸ πλῆθος ἐσιώπησεν.
” Επὶ τούτοις μυρίας ἄλλας ἐν αὐτοῖς Ἱεροσολύμοις κεκινῆαθαι νεωτεροποιίας ὁ αὐτὸς ἐμφαίνει, παριστὰς ὡς οὐδαμῶς ἐξ ἐκείνου διέλιπον τήν τε πόλιν καὶ τὴν Ἰουδαίαν ἅπασαν στάσεις καὶ πόλεμοι καὶ κακῶν ἐπάλληλοι μηχαναί, εἰς ὅτε τὸ πανύστατον ἡ κατὰ Οὐεσπασιανὸν αὐτοὺς μετῆλθεν πολιορκία.
 Ἰουδαίους μὲν οὖν ὧν κατὰ τοῦ χριστοῦ τετολμήκασιν, ταύτῃ πῃ τὰ ἐκ τῆς θείας μετῄει δίκης.
 VII.
 Οὐκ ἀγνοεῖν δὲ ἄξιον ὡς καὶ αὐτὸν ἐκεῖνον τὸν ἐπὶ τοῦ σωτῆρος Πιλᾶτον κατὰ Γάϊον, οὗ τοὺς χρόνους διέξιμεν, τοσαύταις περιπεσειῖν κατέχει λόγος συμφοραῖς, ὡς ἐξ ἀνάγκης αὐτοφονευτὴν ἑαυτοῦ καὶ τιμωρὸν αὐτόχειρα γενέσθαι, τῆς θείας, ὡς then goes on to relate another misfortune which οvertook them, as follows:
“ Αnd after this he roused another commotion by expenffingthe sacred treasure, called Corban, for an aqueduet which he brought froma ffistance οf three hundred stadia.
 Popular indignation was aroused at this, and when Pilate came to Jerusalem the Ρeople stood round with howh of exeeration;
 but he had foreseen their ffidIsturbance and had mixed with the crowd armed soldiers disguised in civilian clothes, with orders nottouse their swordsbut to club thosewhohad shouted.
 Ηe gave the signal for this from his judgement- seat;
 and as the Jews were smitten many perished from the blows, many from being trampled upon hy their fellowsin their ffight, and the mob, οvercome at the calamity οf those who perished, was silent.
” The same writershoWs that besides this innumerable other revolts were started in Jerusalem itseK, affirming that from that time risngs and war and the mutual contrivance of eril never ceased in the city and throughout Judaea, until the time when the siege under vespasian came upon them as the last scene of all.
 Thus the penalty of Ood pursued the Jews for their crimes against Christ.
 VII.
 it is also worthy of notice that tradition relates that that same pilate, he οf the Saviour's time,in thedaysof Caius,whose Ρeriοd we have described, fell into such great calamity thathewas forced to become hisown slayer andto punish himself with his οwn hand, for the Ρenalty of God,as it seems, ἔοικεν, δίκης οὐκ εἰς μακρὸν αὐτὸν μετελθούσης.
 ἱατοροῦσιν Ἑλλήνων οἱ τὰς Ὀλυμπιάδας ἅμα τοῖς κατὰ χρόνους πεπραγμένοις ἀναγράψαντες.
 VIII.
 Ἀλλὰ γὰρ Γάϊον οὐδ’ ὅλοις τέτταρσιν ἔτεσιν τὴν ἀρχὴν κατασχόντα Κλαύδιος αὐτοκράτωρ διαδέχεται·
 καθ’ ὃν λιμοῦ τὴν οἰκουμένην πιέσαντος( τοῦτο δὲ καὶ οἱ πόρρω τοῦ καθ’ ἡμᾶς λόγου συγγραφεῖς ταῖς αὐτῶν ιστορίαις πάρέδοαν), ἡ κατὰ τὰς Πραξεῖς τῶν ἀποστόλων Ἀγάβου προφήτου περὶ τοῦ μέλλειν ἔσεσθαι λιμὸν ἐφ’ ὅλην τὴν οἰκουμένην πέρας ἐλάμβανεν πρόρρηαις.
 τὸν δὲ κατὰ Κλαύδιον λιμὸν ἐπισημηνάμενος ἐν ταῖς πράξεσιν ὁ Λουκᾶς ἱστορήσας τε ὡς ἄρα διὰ Παύλου καὶ Βαρνάβα οἱ κατὰ Ἀωτιόχειαν ἀδελφοὶ τοῖς κατὰ τὴν Ἴου·
 δαίαν ἐξ ὧν ἕκαστος ηὐπόρει διαπεμψάμενοι εἴησαν, ἐπιφέρει λέγων·
( IX.
)“ κατ’ ἐκεῖνον δὲ τὸν καιρόν, δῆλονδ’ ὅτι τὸν ἐπὶ Κλαυδίου, ἐπέβαλεν Ἡρῴδης ὁ βασιλεὺς τὰς χεῖρας κακῶσαί τινας τῶν ἀπὸ τῆς ἐκκλησίας, ἀνεῖλεν δὲ Ἰάκωβον τὸν ἀδελφὸν Ἰωάννου μαχαίρᾳ.
” περὶ τούτου:
 δ’ ὁ Κλήμης τοῦ Ἰακώβου καὶ ἱστορίαν μνήμης ἀξίαν ἐν τῆ τῶν Ὑποτυπώσεων ἑβδόμη παρατίθεται ὡς ἂν ἐκ παραδόσεως τῶν πρὸ αὐτοῦ φάσκων ὅτι δὴ ὁ εἰσαγαγὼν αὐτὸν εἰς ὡμολόγησεν μαρτυρήσαντα αὐτὸν ἰδὼν κινηθείς, ὡμολόγησεν εἶναι καὶ αὐτὸς ἑαυτὸν χριστιανόν.
 “ συναπήχθησαν:
 οὖν ἄμφω,’’ φησίν,“ κοὶ κατὰ τὴν ὁδὸν ἠξίωσεν ἀφεθῆναι αὐτῷ ὑπὸ τοῦ Ἰακώβου·
 ὁ δὲ ὀλίγον σκεψάμενος,‘ εἰρήνη σοι’ εἶπεν καὶ κατεφίλησεν αὐτόν.
 καὶ οὕτως ἀμφότεροι ὁμοῦ ἐκαρατομήθησαν.
 followed hard after him.
 Those who record the olympiads οf the Greeks with the annals οf events relate this.
 1 VIII.
 caius had not completed four years οf sovereignty when Clauffius suceeeded him as Emperor.
 2 In his time famine seized the world( and this also writers 3 with a purpose quite other than ours have reeorded in their histories), and so what the prophet Αgabus had foretold, aceorffing to the Acts οf the Apostles, that a famine would be over the whole wold, received fuffihnent.
 Luke in the Αcts describes the famine in the time οf clauffius and narrates how the Chrirtians at Antioch sentto those in Judaea, eaeh accorffidlng to his ability, by Ρauland Barnabas, and he goes οn to say,( IX.
)“ Νοw at that”— obviously that οf Claudius,—“ Ηerοd the king put forth his hand to vex certain οf the church and killed James the brother of John with the” Concerning this James, clement adds in the seventh book οf the Hypotyposesa story worth mentioning, apparently from the tradition of his predecessors, to the effect that he whobroughthim to the courtwas so moved at seeinghim testify asto eonfess thathe alsowas himselfa Christian.
“ so they Wereboth led away” he says,“ and on the way he asked for forgivensess for himself from James.
 Αnd James looked at him fora moment and said,‘ Ρeace be to’ and kissedhim.
 so both were beheaded at the same time.
” Τότε δῆτα, ὥς φησιν ἡ θεία γραφή, ἰδὼν Ἡρῴδης ἐπὶ τῆ τοῦ Ἰακώβου ἀναιρέσει πρὸς ἡδονῆς γεγονὸς τὸ πραχθὲν τοῖς Ἰουδαίοις, ἐπιτίθεται καὶ Πέτρῳ, δεσμοῖς τε αὐτὸν παραδούς, ὅσον οὔπω καὶ τὸν κατ’ αὐτοῦ φόνον ἐνήργησεν ἄν, εἰ μὴ διὰ θείας ἐπιφανείας, ἐπιστάντος αὐτῷ νύκτωρ ἀγγέλου, παραδόξως τῶν εἱργμῶν ἀπαλλαγείς, ἐπὶ τὴν τοῦ κηρύγματος ἀφεῖται διακονίαν.
 καὶ τὰ μὲν κατὰ Πέτρον οὕτως εἶχεν οἰκονομίας.
 X.
 Τὰ δέ γε τῆς κατὰ τῶν ἀποστόλων ἐγχειρήσεως τοῦ βασιλέως οὐκέτ’ ἀναβολῆς εἴχετο, ἅμα γέ τοι αὐτὸν ὁ τῆς θείας δίκης τιμωρὸς διάκονος μετῄει, παραυτίκα μετὰ τὴν τῶν ἀποστόλων ἐπιβουλήν, ὡς ἡ τῶν Πραξέων ἱστορεῖ γραφή, ὁρμήσαντα μὲν ἐπὶ τὴν Καισάρεινα, ἐν δ’ ἐνταῦθα ἑορτῆς ἡμέρᾳ λαμπρᾷ καὶ βασιλικῇ κοσμησάμενον ἐσθῆτι ὑφηλόν τε πρὸ βήματος κοσμησάμενον τοῦ γάρ τοι δήμου παντὸς ἐπευφημήσαντος ἐπὶ τῆ δημηγορίᾳ ὡς ἐπὶ θεοῦ φωνῇ καὶ οὐκ ἀνθρώπου, παραχρῆμα τὸ λόγιον πατάξαι αὐτὸν ἄγγελον κυρίου ἱστορεῖ, γενόμενόν τε ακωληκόβρωτον ἐκφῦξαι.
 θαυμάσαι δ’ ἄξιον τῆς περὶ τὴν θείαν γραφὴν καὶ ἐν τῷδε τῷ παραδόξῳ συμφωνίας τὴν τοῦ’ Iωαήπου ἱατορίαν, καθ’ ἢν ἐπιμαρτυρῶν τῆ ἀληθείᾳ δῆλός ἐατιν, ἐν τόμῳ τῆς Ἀρχαιολογίας ἐννεακαιδεκάτῳ, ἔνθα αὐτοῖς γράμμασιν ὧδέ πως τὸ θαῦμα διηγεῖται.
 “ τρίτον δ’ ἔτος αὐτῷ βασιλεύοντι τῆς ὅΛης Ἰουδαίας πεπλήρωτο, καὶ πάρην εἰς πόλιν Καισάρεινα, ἢ τὸ πρότερον Στράτωνος πύργος ἐκα- Αt that time, as thedivinde scripture says, Herod, Seeing that his action in the murder of Jame had given pleasure to the Jews, turned to Ρeter also, put him in prison, and would have perpetrated his murder alsO had it not been for Divine intervention at the last moment, for an angel appeared to him by night and he Was miraculously released from lris bonds and set free for the ministry of preaching.
 such Was the dispensation of heaven for Peter.
 X.
 Αs the king 's attempt on the Apostles there was no more delay, but the avenging minister of the sentenee Of God OvertoOk him at once, immediatedly afterhis plot againstthe Apostles, as the Scripture relates in the Acts.
 Ηe had goneto Caesarea,and there on the set day of the feast, 1 adorned with splendid and royal robes, he addressed the standing on high before his judgement- seat.
 The whole people applauded his address, as though at the voiceOfa god and notofa man, and tbe story2 relates that an angel of the Lord smote him at once, and he was eaten of worms and expired.
 Ιt is worthy or wonder how in this marvel also the narrative of Josephus agrees with the diVine seripture.
 He clearly testffiestothe truth in the nineteenth book or the Antiquities where the wonder in related in the following words:
“ Now the third year of his reign over ah Judaea had been ffirished when he came to the eity of Caesarea, wbiCh was formerly called the λεῖτο.
 αυνετέλει δ’ ἐνταῦθα θεωρίας εἰς τὴν Καίσαρος τιμήν, ὑπὲρ τῆς ἐκείνου σωτηρίας ἑορτήν τινα ταύτην ἐπιστάμενος, καὶ παρ’ αὐτὴν ἤθροιστο τῶν κατὰ τὴν ἐπαρχίαν ἐν τέλει καὶ προβεβηκότων εἰς ἀξίαν πλῆθος.
 δευτέρᾳ δὲ τῶν θεωριῶν ἡμέρᾳ στολὴν ἐνδυσάμενος ἐξ πεποιημένην πᾶσαν, ὡς θαυμάσιον ὑφὴν εἶναι, παρῆλθεν εἰς τὸ θέατρον ἀρχομένης ἡμέρας.
 ἔνθα ταῖς πρώταις τῶν ἡλιακῶν ἀκτίνων ἐπιβολαῖς ὁ ἄργυρος καταυγασθείς, θαυμασίως ἀπέστιλβεν, μαρμαίρων τι φοβερὸν καὶ τοῖς εἰς αὐτὸν ἀτενίζουσι φρικῶδες.
 εὐθὺς δὲ οἱ κόλακες τὰς οὐδὲν ἐκείνῳ πρὸς ἀγαθοῦ ἄλλος ἄλλοθεν φωνὰς ἀνεβόων, θεὸν προσαγορεύοντες‘ εὐμενής’ τε‘ εἴης’ ἐπιλέγοντες,‘ εἰ καὶ μέχρι νῦν ὡς ἄνθρωπον ἐφοβήθημεν, ἀλλὰ τοὐντεῦθεν κρείττονά σε θνητῆς φύσεως ὁμολογοῦμεν.’
 οὐκ ἐπέπληξεν τούτοις ὁ βασιλεὺς οὐδὲ τὴν κολακείαν ἀσεβοῦσαν ἀπετρίψατο.
 ἀνακύψας δὲ μετ’ ὀλίγον, τῆς ἑαυτοῦ κεφαλῆς ὑπερκαθεζόμενον εἶδεν ἄγγελον.
 τοῦτον εὐθὺς ἐνόησεν κακῶν εἶναι αἴτιον, τὸν καί ποτε ὢθ’ ὢἴ’δ’δ’ ἑ τῶν ἀγάθων γενόμενον, καὶ διακάρδιον ἐσχεν ὀδύνην, ἄθρουν δ’ αὐτῷ τῆς κοιλίας προσέφυσεν ἄλγημα, μετὰ σφοδρότητος ἀρξάμενον.
 ἀναθεωρῶν οὖν πρὸς τοὺς φίλους, ἴ’ ὁ θεὸς ὑμῖν ἐγώ,’ φησίν, ἤδη καταστρέφειν ἐπιτάττομαι τὸν βίον, παραχρῆμα τῆς εἱμαρμένης τὰς ἄρτι μου κατεψευσμένας φωνὰς ἐΛεγχούσης.
 ὁ κληθεὶς ἀθά ὑφ’ ὑμῶν, ἤδη θανεῖν ἀπάγομαι.
 δεκτέον δὲ τὴν πεπρωμένην, ἦ θεὸς βεβούληται.
 καὶ tower οf strato.
 There he was celebrating gameS inhonourοf Caesar, beeause he knew that this wasa kind of feastforhis safety, and at it waS asSembled a multitude of those in office and of high rank in the province.
 On the secondday of the gameshe put onarobe made entirely of silver, so thatitwaSa wonderul fabrie, and proceeded to the theatre at the beginning of the day.
 Then when the silver waS refulgent with the first glint of the rayS of the sun it gleamed marvellously witha peculiar sheen, fearful and terrifying to those who gazed at it.
 Αt onee the flatterers raised their voiceS from various quarters— but no good did it do him — and addresSed him asagod, saying,Be thou propitious! even if untilnow we fearedtheeas man, yet from henceforth we confess thee as of more than mortal’ The kingWasnot diSmayed at these wordS, nor did he reject the impiouS Rattery.
 But after a little looking up he saw anangel seated abovehiS head.
 1 ThiS he at once Ρerceived to be theharbingerof evil, as ithad formerly been of good;
 1 he had in his hiS heart, and agony rapidly beginning Spread increasingly through hiS stomach.
 So he lookedupto hiSfriendSand said,ἴ’I, Whoamyour god, am now commandedto give up my life,for fate has immediately reproved the lying wordS just urtered about me.
 I, whom you called im- mortal,am now being taken off to ffie.
 Fate muSt be accepted aS Ood haS willed, yetI have γὰρ βεβιώκαμεν οὐδαμῇ φαύλως, ἀλλ’ ἐπὶ τῆς μακαριζομένης μακρότητος. ’
 ταῦτα δὲ λέγων ἐπι- τάσει τῆς ὀδύνης κατεπονεῖτο·
 μετὰ σπουδῆς οὖν εἰς τὸ βασίλειον ἐκομίσθη, καὶ διῇξε λόγος εἰς πάντας ὡς ἔχοι τοῦ τεθνάναι παντάπασι μετ’ ὀλίγον.
 ἡ πληθὺςδ’ αὐτίκα σὺν γυναιξὶ καὶ παισὶν ἐπὶ σάκκον καθεσθεῖσα τῷ πατρίῳ νόμῳ τὸν θεὸν ἱκέτευον ὑπὲρ τοῦ βασιλέως, οἰμωγῆς τε πάντ’ ἢν ἀνάπλεα καὶ θρήνων.
 ἐν ὑψηλῷ δ’ ὁ βασιλεὺς δωματίῳ κατακείμενος καὶ κάτω βλέπων αὐτοὺς πρηνεῖς προπίπτοντας, ἄδακρυς οὐδ’ αὐτὸς ἔμενεν.
 συνεχεῖς δ’ ἐφ’ ἡμέρας πέντε τῷ τῆς γαστρὸς ἀλγήματι διεργασθείς, τὸν βίον κατέστρεφεν, ἀπὸ γενέσεως ἄγων πεντηκοστὸν ἔτος καὶ τέταρτον, τῆς δὲ βασιλείας ἕβδομον.
 τέσσαρας μὲν οὖν ἐπὶ Γαΐου Καίσαρος ἐβασί- λευσεν ἐνιαυτούς, τῆς Φιλίππου μὲν τετραρχίας εἰς τριετίαν ἄρξας, τῷ τετάρτῳ δὲ καὶ τὴν Ἡρῴδου προσειληφώς, τρεῖς δ’ ἐπιλαβὼν τῆς Κλαυδίου Καίσαρος αὐτοκρατορίας’ ’ ταῦτα τὸν Ἰώσηπονὒ μετὰ τῶν ἄλλων ταῖς θείαις συναληθεύοντα γραφαῖς ἀποθαυμάζω·
 εἰ δὲ περὶ τὴν τοῦ βασιλέως πρόα·
 ηγορίαν δόξειέν τισιν διαφωνεῖν, ἀλλ’ ὅ γε χρόνος καὶ ἡ πρᾶξις τὸν αὐτὸν ὄντα δείκνυσιν, ἤτοι κατά τι σφάλμα γραφικὸν ἐνηλλαγμένου τοῦ ὀνόματος ἢ καὶ διωνυμίας περὶ τὸν αὐτόν, οἷα καὶ περὶ πολλούς, γεγενημένης.
 XI.
 Ἐπεὶ δὲ πάλιν ὁ Λουκᾶς ἐν ταῖς Πράξεσιν εἰσάγει τὸν Γαμαλιὴλ ἐν τῆ περὶ τῶν ἀποστόλων σκέψει λέγοντα ὡς ἄρα κατὰ τὸν δηλούμενον χρόνον ἀνέστη θευσᾶς λέγων ἑαυτὸν εἶναι τινά, ὃς κατελύθη, καὶ πάντες ὅσοι ἐπείσθησαν αὐτῷ, lived no mean life, but in the spaciouSneSs which men deem’ while he was Saying this, he began to be overwhelmed by the intensity of his pain;
 he waS thereforeearried haStily hrtOthe Ρalaee,and the report was Spread among all that he would certainly die shortly.
 But the multitude seated on sackeloth with their wivesand ehildren, aeeording tothe laWof their fatherS, at once began to beseeeh Ood for the king and the whole Ρlace Was ffiled with wailing and lamentations.
 The king lying in a room on high, and looking down on them aS they fell prostrate, did not remain without tears himselr.
 Αfter being racked by pain in the stomach for Bve suceessive dayS he passed from life inthefityfourth year of his ageand the Seventh of hiS reign.
 1 Ηe had reigned four years in the time of CaiuS Caesar.
 For three years he possessed the tetrarchyof Philip,but in the fourth reeeived alSo thatof Ηerod, and he continued for three more yearS in the reignof ClaudiuS’’ 1 am surprisedhow in thiSandother points JoSephuS conhrmS the truth of the divine Scriptures.
 Even if he seem to some to differ as to the name of the king, neVertheless the date and the events Show that he is the same, and either that the name has been ehanged by some clerical error οr that there were tWo names for the same man, as has happened with many.
 XI.
 Since Luke in the Αcts introduceS Gamaliel as saying at the inquiry about the Apostles that at the time indicated Theudas aroSe, saying thatheWaS Somebody, and thathe was destroyedand all who διεΛύθησαν·
 φέρε, καὶ τὴν περὶ τούτου παραθώμεθα τοῦ Ἰωσήπου γραφήν.
 ἱστορεῖ τοίνυν αὖθις κατὰ τὸν ἀρτίως δεδηλωμένον αὐτοῦ λόγον αὐτὰ δὴ ταῦτα κατὰ λέξιν,“ Φάδου δὲ τῆς Ἰουδαίας ἐπιτροπεύοντος, γόης τις ἀνήρ, Θευδᾶς ὀνόματι, πείθει τὸν πλεῖστον ὄχλον ἀναλαβόντα τὰς κτήαεις ἕπεσθαι πρὸς τὸν Ίορδάνην ποταμὸν αὐτῷ·
 προφήτης ἔλεγεν εἶναι, καὶ προστάγματι τὸν ποταμὸν σχίσας δίοδον ἔφη παρέξειν αὐτοῖς ῥᾳ- δίαν, καὶ ταῦτα λέγων πολλοὺς ἠπάτησεν.
 οὐ μὴν εἴασεν αὐτοὺς τῆς ἀφροσύνης ὀνάσθαι θάσος, ἀλλ᾿ ἐξέπεμψεν ἴλην ἱππέων ἐπ’ αὐτούς, ἥτις ἐπιπεσοῦσα ἀπροσδοκήτως αὐτοῖς, πολλοὺς μὲν ἀνεῖλεν, πολλοὺς δὲ ζῶντας ἔλαβεν, αὐτόν τε τόν Θευδᾶν ζωγρήσαντες ἀποτέμνουσιν τὴν κεφαλὴν καὶ κομίζουσιν εἰς Ἱεροσόλυμα.
” Τούτοις ἑξῆς καὶ τοῦ κατὰ Κλαύδιον γενομένου λιμοῦ μνημονεύει ὧδέ πως·
 XII.
“ ἐπὶ τούτοις γε καὶ’ τον μέγαν λιμὸν κάτα τὴν Ἰουδαίαν ευνέβη γενέσθαι, καθ’ ὃν καὶ ἡ βασίλισσα Ἑλένη πολλῶν χρημάτων ὠνησαμένη σῖτον ἀπὸ τῆς Αἰγύπτου, διένειμεν τοῖς ἀπορουμένοις” σύμφωναδ’ ἄν εὕροις καὶ ταῦτα τῇ τῶν Πραξέων τῶν ἀποστόλων περιεχούσῃ ὡς ἄρα τῶν κατ’ Αντιόχεινα μαθητῶν καθὼς ηὐπορεῖτό τις, ὥρισαν ἕκαστος εἰς διακονίαν ἀποστεῖλαι τοῖς κατοικοῦσιν ἐν τῇ Ἰουδαίᾳ·
 ὃ καὶ ἐποίησαν, ἀποστείλαντες πρὸς τοὺς πρεσβυτέρους διὰ χειρὸς Βαρνάβα καὶ Παύλου.
 τῆς γέ τοι Ἑλένης, ἧς δὴ καὶ ὁ συγγραξεὺς ἐποιήσατο μνήμην, εἰς ἔτι νῦν obeyedhim were scartercd;
 eome, let us compare the writing of Josephus with regard to him.
 1 in his vork lately mentioned he give the following narrartive.
“ Νov when Fadus was procurator of Judaeaa eertain impOtOr named Theudas persuaded a great multitude to take their possessions and follow him to the riVer Jordan, fOr he Said that he was a prophet and ulldertook to divide the river by hiS commands and provide an eay erossing for them.
 By saying this he deceived many;
 Fadus, however,did not alloW them to enjoy their delusiOn, but senta Squadron of cavelry against them whieh attaeked them unexpectedly, killed many and took many alive, captured TheudaS himself, cut off his head, and brought it to Jerusalem.
” After this he mentions mentions as follOWs the famine Whieh took Ρlace in the time of Claudius:
 XII.
“ Αt the Sametime it happened that the great faminetOOk plaee in Judaea, in Whieh Queen Ηelena bought corn from Egypt at great expense and distributed it to those who were in” You would find that this too agrees ẁ̀ith the writing of the Acts οf the Αpostles, whieh reeords hoW the disciples in Αntioch, each aceordingto his several ability, deter- mined to send to the relier of the dwellers in Judaea, which they did, sending itto the eldemby the handof Barnabas and Ρaul.
 Splendid monuments of the Ηelena whom the historian has COmmemOrated are Theudas eannot really have been rererred toby Gamaliel,who was speaking many years before the time of Fadus.
 Μοst modern writers on Αcts think that nevertheless the Helena whom the historian has commemorated are στῆλαι διαφανεῖς ἐν προαστείοις δείκνυνται τῆς νῦν Αἰλίας·
 τοῦ δὲ Ἀδισβηνῶν ἔθνους αὕτη βασιΛεῦσαι ἐλέγετο.
 XIII.
 Ἀλλὰ γὰρ τῆς εἰς τὸν σωτῆρα καὶ κύριον ἡμῶν Ἰησοῦν χριατὸν εἰς πάντας ἀνθρώπους ἤδη διαδιδομένης πίστεως, ὁ τῆς ἀνθρώπων πολέμιος σωτηρίας τὴν βασιλεύουσαν προαρπάσασθαι πόλιν μηχανώμενος, ἐνταῦθα Σίμωνα τὸν πρόσθεν δεδηλωμένον ἄγει, καὶ δὴ ταῖς ἐντέχνοις τἀνδρὸς δεδηλωμένον γοητείαις πλείους τῶν τὴν Ῥώμνη οἰκούντων ἐπὶ τὴν πλάνην σφετερίζεται.
 δηλοῖ δὲ τοῦθ’ ὁ μετ’ οὐ πολὺ τῶν ἀποστόλων ἐν τῷ καθ’ ἡμᾶς διαπρέψας λόγῳ Ἰουστῖνος, περὶ οὗ τὰ προσήκοντα κατὰ καιρὸν παραθήσομαι·
 ὅγ’ δὴ ἐν τῆ προτέρᾳ πρὸς’ Αντωνῖνον ὑπὲρ τοῦ καθ’ ἡμᾶς δόγματος ἀπολογίᾳ γράφων ὧδέ φησιν·
“ Καὶ μετὰ τὴν ἀνάληψιν τοῦ κυρίου εἰς οὐρανὸν προεβάλλοντο οἱ δαίμονες ἀνθρώπους τινὰς λέγον·
 ἑαυτοὺς εἶναι θεούς, οἳ οὐ μόνον οὐκ ἐδιώχθησαν ὑφ’ ὑμῶν, ἀλλὰ καὶ τιμῶν ἠξιώθησαν·
 Σίμωνα μέν τινα Σαμαρέα, τὸν ἀπὸ κώμης λεγομένης Γίτθων, ὃς ἐπὶ Κλαυδίου Καίσαρος διὰ τῆς τῶν ἐνεργούντων δαιμόνων τέχνης δυνάμεις μαγικὰς ποιήσας ἐν τῇ πόλει ὑμῶν τῇ βασιλίδι Ῥώμῃ θεὸς ἐνομίσθη καὶ ἀνδριάντι παρ’ ὑμῶν ὡς θεὸς τετίμηται ἐν τῷ Τίβερι ποταμῷ μεταξὺ τῶν δύο γεφυρῶν, ἔχων ἐπιγραφὴν Ῥωμαϊκὴν ταύτην·
 SIMONI DEO” ὅπερ ἐστὶν Σίμωνι θεῷ ἁγίῳ.
 1“ καὶ σχεδὸν μὲν πάντες Σαμαρεῖς, ὀλίγοι’ δε καὶ ἐν ἄλλοις ἔθνεσιν ὡς τὸν πρῶτον θεὸν ἐκεῖνον still shown in the suburbs of the present Aelia 1;
 she Vas Said to be queen Of the nationof Αdiabene.
 XIII.
 Seeing that the faith in our sariour and Lord Jesus Christ was already being given to all men, the enemy of men's salvation plannedto capture rile capital in advanee, and sent there simon, who was mentioned above, and by aiding the’s trieky soreery won over to error many Of the inhabitants of Rome.
 This is told by Jurtin, Who wasan ornament of our farthnot Ιong after the Apostles, and I will set out the necessary infoimation about him in due eourse.
 Ιn his first Apology to Antoninusforour opinions he writes as follows:
“ Αnd afterthe ascensiOn of the Lord intO heaven the demOns Ρut forward men Vho said that they were gOds, and they not only escaped perseeution by you but were eVen Vouehsafed honours.
 There Wasa certain simon,a Samaritan, from aVillage callcd Gittho, vho in the time of Claudius Caesar worked miracles by magie through the art of the demOns possessing him;
 he Was reekoned asa god in Rome, your capital city, and honoured as a god among you by a statue οn the river Tiber between the two bridges, with this inscription in Latin — SIMONI DEO SANCTO, 2 ” that is to Simon a holy god.
“ and almostall Samaritans anda few in othernationsa well, recognize him as the chief god and worship him, and ὁμολογοῦντες προσκυνοῦαιν.
 καὶ Ἑλένην τινά, τὴν συμπερινστήσασαν αὐτῷ κατ’ ἐκεῖνο τοῦ καιροῦ, πρότερον ἐπὶ τέγους σταθεῖσαν’’ ἐν Τύρῳ τῆς Φοινίκης, “ τὴν ἀπ’ αὐτοῦ πρώτην ἔννοιαν λέγουσιν.
” Ταῦτα μὲν οὗτος·
 αυνᾴδει δ’ αὐτῷ καὶ Εἰρηναῖος, ἐν πρώτῳ τῶν πρὸς τὰς αἱρέσεις ὁμοῦ τὰ περὶ τὸν ἄνδρα καὶ τὴν ἀνοσίαν καὶ μιαρὰν διδασκαλίαν ὑπογράφων, ἢν ἐπὶ τοῦ παρόντος περιττὸν ἂν εἴη καταλέγειν, παρὸν τοῖς βουλομένοις καὶ τῶν μετ’ αὐτὸν κατὰ μέρος αἱρεσιαρχῶν τὰς ἀρχὰς καὶ τοὺς βίους καὶ τῶν ψευδῶν δογμάτων τὰς ὑποθέσεις τά τε πᾶσιν αὐτοῖς ἐπιτετηδευμένα διαγνῶναι, οὐ κατὰ πάρεργον τῆ δεδηλωμένη τοῦ Εἰρηναίου παραδεδομένα βίβλῳ.
 πάαης μὲν οὗν ἀρχηγὸν αἱρέσεως πρῶτον γενέσθαι τὸν Σίμωνα παρειλήφαμεν·
 ἐξ οὗ καὶ εἰς δεῦρο οἱ τὴν κατ’ αὐτὸν μετιόντες αἵρεσιν τὴν αώφρονα καὶ διὰ καθαρότητα βίου παρὰ τοῖς πᾶσιν βεβοημένην χριστιανῶν φιλοσοφίαν ὑποκρινόμενοι, ἧς μὲν ἔδοξαν ἀπαλλάττεσθαι περὶ τὰ εἴδωλα δεισιδαιμονίας οὐδὲν ἧττον αὗθις ἐπιλαμβάνονται, καταπίπτοντες ἐπὶ γραφὰς καὶ εἰκόνας αὐτοῦ τε τοῦ Σίμωνος καὶ τῆς σὺν αὐτῷ δηλωθείσης Ἑλένης θυμιάμασίν τε καὶ θυσίαις καὶ σπονδαῖς τούτους θρησκεύειν ἐγχειροῦντες, τὰ δὲ τούτων αὐτοῖς ἀπορρητότερα, ὧν φααι τὸν πρῶτον ἐπακούσαντα ἀπορρητότερα, καὶ κατά τι παρ’ αὐτοῖς λόγιον ἔγγραφον θαμβωθήσεσθαι, θάμβους ὡς ἀληθῶς καὶ φρενῶν ἐκοτάσεως καὶ μανίας ἔμπλεα τυγχάνει, ὄντα, ὡς μὴ μόνον μὴ δυνατὰ εἷναι they say thata certain Helena, who travelled about with him at that timebuthad formerly lived in a house of ill- fame’’ in Tyre of Phoenicia,“ was the first Idea1 from him.
” This is what Justin says, and Irenaeus agrees with him in the first book against heresies where he collects the stories about Simon and his unholy and foul teaching.
 It would be superfluous to relate this in the present work since those who desire it can study in detail the origin and life and the false doctrinal principles of the heresiarchs who followed him and the customs introduced by them all, for they are carefully preserved in the above- mentioned book of Irenaeus.
 Thus we have received the tradition that Simon was the first author ofall heresy.
 From him, and downtothe present time, those who have followed, feigning the Christian philosophy, with its sobriety and universal fame for purity of life, have in no way improved on the idolatrous superstition from which they thought tobe set free, for they prostrate themselves before pictures and images of Simon himselfand of Helena, who was mentioned with him, and undertaketo worship them with incenseand sacrifices and libations.
 Their more secret rites, at which they say that he who first hears them will be astonished, and according to a scripture current among them will be “ thrown into marvel,” truly are full of marvel and frenzy and madness;
 for they are of sucha kind that they not merely παραδοθῆναι γραφῆ, ἀλλ’ οὐδὲ χείλεσιν αὐτὸ μόνον δι’ ὑπερβολὴν αἰσχρουργίας τε καὶ ἀρρητοποιίας ἀνδράσι σώφροσι λαληθῆναι.
 ὅ τι ποτὲ γὰρ ἂν ἐπινοηθείη παντὸς αἰσχροῦ μιαρώτερον, τοῦτο πᾶν ὑπερηκόντισεν ἡ τῶνδε μιαρώτερον, αἵρεσις, ταῖς ἀθλίαις καὶ παντοίων ὡς ἀληθῶς κακῶν σεσωρευμέναις γυναιξὶν ἐγκαταπαιζόντων.
 XIV.
 τοιούτων κακῶν πατέρα καὶ δημιουργὸν τὸν Σίμωνα κατ’ ἐκεῖνο καιροῦ ὥσπερ εἰ μέγαν καὶ μεγάλων ἀντίπαλον τῶν θεσπεσίων τοῦ σωτῆρος ἡμῶν ἀποστόλων ἡ μισόκαλος καὶ τῆς ἀνθρώπων ἐπίβουλος σωτηρίας πονηρὰ δύναμις προυστήσατο.
 ὅμως δ’ οὖν ἡ θεία καὶ ὑπερουράνιος χάρις τοῖς αὐτῆς συναιρομένη διακόνοις, δι’ ἐπιφανείας αὐτῶν καὶ παρουσίας ἀναπτομένην τοῦ πονηροῦ τὴν φλόγα ᾖ τάχος ἐσβέννυ, ταπεινοῦσα δι’ αὐτῶν καὶ καθαιροῦσα πᾶν ὕψωμα ἐπαιρόμενον κατὰ τῆς γνώσεως τοῦ θεοῦ.
 διὸ δὴ οὔτε Σίμωνοςοὔτ’ ἄλλου του τῶν τότε φυέντων συγκρότημά τι κατ’ αὐτοὺς ἐκείνους τοὺς ἀποστολικοὺς ὑπέστη χρόνους.
 ὑπερενίκα γάρ τοι καὶ ὑπερίσχυεν ἅπαντα τὸ τῆς ἀληθείας φέγγος ὅ τε λόγος αὐτὸς ὁ θεῖος ἄρτι θεόθεν ἀνθρώποις ἐπιΛάμψας ἐπὶ γῆς τε ἀκμάζων καὶ τοῖς ἰδίοις ἀποστόλοις ἐμπολιτευόμενος.
 αὐτίκα ὁ δηλωθεὶς γόης ὥσπερ ὑπὸ θείας καὶ μαρμαρυγῆς τὰ τῆς διανοίας πληγεὶς ὄμματα ὅτε πρότερον ἐπὶ τῆς Ἰουδαίας ἐφ’ οἷς ἐπονηρεύσατο πρὸς τοῦ ἀποστόλου Πέτρου κατεφωράθη, μεγίστην καὶ ὑπερπόντιον ἀπάρας πορείαν τὴν ἀπ’ ἀνατολῶν ἐπὶ δυσμὰς ᾤχετο φεύγων, μόνως ταύτῃ βιωτὸν αὐτῷ κατὰ γνώμην εἶναι οἰόμενος·
 ἐπιβὰς δὲ τῆς ῾Ρωμαίων πόλεως, συν- cannot berelatedin writing,but are so full of baseness and unspeakable conduct that they cannot even be mentioned by the lips of decent men.
 For whatever foulness might be conceived beyond all that is base, it is surpassed by the utter foulness of the heresyof these men, who makea mocking sportof wretched women,“ weighed”as is truly said, by every kind of evil.
 XIV.
 of such evil was Simon the fatherand fabricator,and the Evil Power, which hates that whichis good and plots against the salvation of men, raised him up at that timeasa great antagonistforthe great and inspiredApostles of our Saviour.
 Nevertheless the grace of God which is from heaven helped its ministers and quickly extinguished the flamesof the EvilOneby their advent and presence, and through them humbled and cast down“ every high thing that exalteth itself against the knowledge of God.
” Wherefore no conspiracy, either of Simon, or of any other of those who aroseat that time,succeededin those Apostolic days;
 for the light of the truth and the divine Logos himelf, which had shone from God upon men by growing up on the earth and dwelling amonghis own Apostles, was overcoming all things in the might of victory.
 The aforesaid sorcerer, as though the eyes of his mind had been smitten by the marvellous effulgence of God when he had formerly been detected in his crimes in Judaea bythe Apostle Peter, at once undertook a great journey across the sea, and went off in flight from east to west, thinking that only in this way could he live as he wished.
 He came tothe cityof the Romans, αἰρομένης αὐτῷ τὰ μεγάλα τῆς ἐφεδρευούσης ἐνταῦθα δυνάμεως, ἐν ὀλίγῳ τοσοῦτον τὰ τῆς ἐπιχειρήσεως ἤνυστο, ὡς καὶ ἀνδριάντος ἀναθέσει πρὸς τῶν τῇδε οἷα θεὸν τιμηθῆναι.
 οὐ μὴν εἰς μακρὸν αὐτῷ ταῦτα προυχώρει.
 παρὰ πόδας γοῦν ἐπὶ τῆς αὐτῆς Κλαυδίου βασιλείας ἡ πανάγαθος καὶ φιλανθρωποτάτη τῶν ὅλων πρόνοια τὸν καρτερὸν καὶ μέγαν τῶν ἀποστόλων, τὸν ἀρετῆς ἕνεκα τῶν λοιπῶν ἁπάντων προήγορον, Πέτρον, ἐπὶ τὴν ῾Ρώμην ὡς ἐπὶ τηλικοῦτον λυμεῶνα βίου χειραγωγεῖ·
 ὃς οἷά τις γενναῖος θεοῦ στρατηγὸς γ’ γ’ τοῖς θείοις ὅπλοις φραξάμενος, τὴν πολυτίμητον ἐμπορίαν τοῦ νοητοῦ φωτὸς ἐξ ἀνατολῶν τοῖς κατὰ δύσιν ἐκόμιζεν, φῶς αὐτὸ καὶ λόγον ψυχῶν σωτήριον, τὸ κήρυγμα τῆς τῶν οὐρανῶν βασιλείας, εὐαγγελιζόμενος.
 XV.
 οὕτω δὴ οὖν ἐπιδημήσαντος αὐτοῖς τοῦ θείου λόγου, ἡ μὲν τοῦ Σίμωνος ἀπέσβη καὶ παραχρῆμα σὺν καὶ τῷ ἀνδρὶ καταλέλυτο δύναμις.
 Τοσοῦτον δ’ ἐπέλαμψεν ταῖς τῶν ἀκροατῶν τοῦ Πέτρου διανοίαις εὐσεβείας φέγγος, ὡς μὴ τῆ εἰς ἅπαξ ἱκανῶς ἔχειν ἀρκεῖσθαι ἀκοῇ μηδὲ τῇ ἀγράφῳ τοῦ θείου κηρύγματος διδασκαλίᾳ, παρακλήσεσιν δὲ παντοίαις Μάρκον, οὗ τὸ εὐαγγέλιον φέρεται, ἀκόλουθον ὄντα Πέτρου, λιπαρῆσαι ὡς ἂν καὶ διὰ γραφῆς ὑπόμνημα τῆς διὰ λόγου παραδοθείσης αὐτοῖς καταλείψοι διδασκαλίας, μὴ πρότερόν τε ἀνεῖναι ἢ κατεργάσαθαι τὸν ἄνδρα, καὶ ταύτῃ αἰτίους γενέσθαι τῆς τοῦ λεγομένου κατὰ Μάρκον εὐαγγελίου γραφῆς.
 γνόντα δὲ τὸ πραχθέν φασι τὸν ἀπόστολον ἀποκαλύψαντος αὐτῷ τοῦ πνεύματος, ἡσθῆναι τῇ τῶν ἀνδρῶν προθυμίᾳ κυρῶσαί where the power which obsessed him wrought withhim greatly,so thatina short timehe achieved such success that he was honoured asa god by the erection ofa statue by those who were there.
 But he did not prosper long.
 Close after him in the samereignof Claudius the Providence of the universe in its great goodness and love towards men guidedto Rome, as againsta gigantic peston life, the great and mighty Peter, who for his virtues was the leader of all the Other Apostles.
 Like a noble captain of God, clad in divine armour, he brought the costly merchandise of the spiritual light from the east to the dwellersin the west, preaching the Gospel of the light itself and the word which saves souls, the proclamation of the Kingdom of Heaven.
 XV.
 Thus when the divine word made its home among them the power of Simon was extinguished and perished immediately.
 together with the fellow himself.
 But a great light of religion shone on the minds of the hearersof Peter, so that they were not satisfied witha single hearing or with the unwritten teaching of the divine proclamation, but with every kind of exhortation besought Mark, whose Gospel is extant, seeing that he was Ρeter’s follower,to leave thema written statementofthe teachinggiven them verbally, nor didthey cease until they had persuaded him, and so became the cause of the Scripture called the Gospel according to Mark.
 And they say that the Apostle, knowing by the revelation of the spirit to him whathadbeen done, was pleased at their τε τὴν γραφὴν εἰς ἔντευξιν ταῖς ἐκκλησίαις.
 Κλήμης ἐν ἕκτῳ τῶν ῾Υποτυπώσεων παρατέθειται τὴν ἱστορίαν, συνεπιμαρτυρεῖ δὲ αὐτῷ καὶ ὁ ῾Ιεραπολίτης ἐπίσκοπος ὀνόματι Παπίας, τοῦ δὲ Μάρκου μνημονεύειν τὸν Πέτρον ἐν τῇ προτέρᾳ ἐπιστολῇ·
 ἢν καὶ συντάξαι φασὶν ἐπ’ αὐτῆς ῾Ρώμης, σημαίνειν τε τοῦτ’ αὐτόν, τὴν πόλιν τροπικώτερον Βαβυλῶνα προσειπόντα διὰ τούτων “ ἀσπάζεται ὑμᾶς ἡ ἐν Βαβυλῶνι συνεκλεκτὴ καὶ Μάρκος ὁ υἱός μου.
” XVI.
 τοῦτον δὲ Μάρκον πρῶτόν φασιν ἐπὶ τῆς Αἰγύπτου στειλάμενον, τὸ εὐαγγέλιον, ὃ δὴ καὶ συνεγράψατο, κηρῦξαι, ἐκκλησίας τε πρῶτον ἐπ’ αὐτῆς Ἀλεξανδρείας συστήσασθαι.
 τοσαύτη δ᾿ ἄρα τῶν αὐτόθι πεπιστευκότων πληθὺς ἀνδρῶν τε καὶ γυναικῶν ἐκ πρώτης ἐπιβολῆς συνέστη δι’ ἀσκήσεως φιλοσοφωτάτης τε καὶ σφοδροτάτης, ὡς καὶ γραφῆς αὐτῶν ἀξιῶσαι τὰς διατριβὰς καὶ τὰς συνηλύσεις τά τε συμπόσια καὶ πᾶσαν τὴν ἄλλην τοῦ βίου ἀγωγὴν τὸν Φίλωνα·
 XVII.
 ὃν καὶ λόγος ἔχει κατὰ Κλαύδιον ἐπὶ τῆς ῾Ρώμης εἰς ὁμιλίαν ἐλθεῖν Πέτρῳ, τοῖς ἐκεῖσε τότε κηρύττοντι.
 καὶ οὐκ ἀπεικὸς ἂν εἴη τοῦτό γε, ἐπεὶ καὶ ὅ φαμεν αὐτὸ σύγγραμμα, εἰς ὕστερον καὶ μετὰ χρόνους αὐτῷ πεπονημένον, σαφῶς τοὺς εἰς ἔτι νῦν καὶ εἰς ἡμᾶς πεφυλαγμένους τῆς ἐκκλησίας περιέχει κανόνας·
 ἀλλὰ καὶ τὸν βίον τῶν παρ’ ἡμῖν ἀσκητῶν ὡς ἔνι μάλιστα ἀκριβέστατα ἱστορῶν, γένοιτ’ ἄν ἔκδηλος οὐκ εἰδὼς μόνον, ἀλλὰ καὶ ἀποδεχόμενος ἐκθειάζων τε καὶ σεμνύνων τοὺς κατ’ αὐτὸν ἀποστολικοὺς ἄνδρας, ἐξ Ἑβραίων, ὡς ἔοικε, γεγονότας ταύτῃ τε ἰουδαϊκώτερον τῶν παλαιῶν zeal, and ratified the scripture for study in the churches.
 Clement quotes the story in the sixth book of the Hypotyposes, and thebishop of Hierapolis, named Papias, confirms him.
 Ηe also says that Peter mentions Μark in his first Epistle, and that he composed this in Rome itself, which they say that he himself indicates, referring to the city metaphorically as Babylon,in the words,“ the elect oneinBabylon greets you, and Marcus my son.
” XVI.
 They Say that this Μark was the first to be sent to preach in Egypt the Gospel which he had also put into writing, and was the first to establish churches in Alexandria itself.
 The number of men and women who were there converted at the first attempt wasso great,and their asceticism was so extraordinarily philosophic, that Philo thought it right to describe their conduct and assemblies and meals and all the rest of their manner of life.
 XVII.
 Tradition says that he came to Rome in the timeofClaudius to speak to Peter, who was at that timepreachingto those there.
 This would, indeed,be not improbable since the treatise to which we refer, composed by him many years later, obviously contains the rules of the Church which are still observed in our own time.
 Moreover, from his very accurate description of the life of our ascetics it will be plain that he not onlyknewbut welcomed, reverenced,and recognized the divine mission of the apostolic men of his day, who were, it appears, of Hebrew origin, and thus still preserved most of the ancient ἔτι τὰ πλεῖατα διατηροῦντας ἐθῶν.
 πρῶτόν γέ τοι τὸ μηθὲν πέρα τῆς ἀληθείας οἴκοθεν καὶ ἐξ ἑαυτοῦ προαθήσειν οἷς ἱστορήσειν ἔμελλεν, ἀπ’·
 ιαχυρισάμενος ἐν ᾧ ἐπέγραφεν λόγῳ Περὶ βίου θεωρητικοῦ ἢ ἱκετῶν, θεραπευτὰς αὐτοὺς καὶ τὰς σὺν αὐτοῖς γυναῖκας θεραπευτρίδας ἀποκαλεῖσθαί φησιν, τὰς αἰτίας ἐπειπὼν τῆς τοιᾶσδε προσρήσεως, ἤτοι παρὰ τὸ τὰς φυχὰς τῶν προσιόντων αὐτοῖς τῶν ἀπὸ κακίας παθῶν ἰατρῶν δίκην ἀπαλλάττοντας ἀκεῖσθαι καὶ θεραπεύειν, ἢ τῆς περὶ τὸ θεῖον καθαρᾶς καὶ εἰλικρινοῦς θεραπείας τε καὶ θρησκείας ἕνεκα.
 εἴτ’ οὗν ἐξ ἑαυτοῦ ταύτην αὐτοῖς ἐπιτέθειται τὴν προαηγορίαν, οἰκείως ἐπιγραφὰς τῷ τρόπῳ τῶν ἀνδρῶν τοὔνομα, εἴτε καὶ ὄντως τοῦτ’ αὐτοὺς ἐκάλουν κατ’ ἀρχὰς οἱ πρῶτοι, μηδαμῶς τῆς χριστιανῶν πω προσ- ρήαεως ἀνὰ πάντα τόπον ἐπιπεφημισμένης, οὔ τί πω διατείνεσθαι ἀναγκαῖον·
 ὅμως δ' οὑν ὲν πρώτοις τὴν ἀπόταξιν αὐτοῖς τῆς οὐσίας μαρτυρεῖ, φάσκων ἀρχομένους φιλοσοφεῖν ἐξίστασθαι τοῖς ταξαμένους τῶν ὑπαρχόντων, ἔπειτα πάσαις ἀπο- ταξαμένους ταῖς τοῦ βίου φροντίσιν, ἔξω τειχῶν προελθόντας, ἐν μοναγρίοις καὶ κήποις τὰς δια- τριβὰς ποιεῖαθαι, τὰς ἐκ τῶν ἀνομοίων ἐπιμιξίας ἀλυσιτελεῖς καὶ βλαβερὰς εὖ εἰδότας, τῶν κατ’ ἐκεῖνο καιροῦ τοῦθ’, ὡς εἰκός, ἐπιτελούντων, ἐκθύμῳ καὶ θερμοτάτη πίστει τὸν προφητικὸν ζηλοῦν ἀσκούντων βίον.
 καὶ γὰρ οὗν κἀν ταῖς ὁμολογουμέναις τῶν ἀποατόλων Πράξεσιν ἐμ·
 φέρεται ὅτι δὴ πάντες οἱ τῶν ἀποατόλων γνώριμοι customs in a strictly jewish manner.
 Ιn the first Ρlace he promises not go beyond the truth in any detail or to add anything of his own invention to what he vasgoingto relate in the treatise whieh he entitled οἰὶ με Contemplative Life or Suppliants.
 Ηe then says that tbey and the women with them Were called Therapeutae and Therapeutrides, and enters upon the reason for such a name.
 Ιt was given either beeause, lilke physicians, they relieve from the Ρassiοns οf evil the souls those who come to them and so cure and heal them, or because of their pure and sincere serVice 1 and worship of the Divine.
 Thus it is not neeessary to discuss at length whether he gave them this descriptionof himself, naturally adapting the name to their manner of life, or vhether the rirst ones really called themselves this from the beginning, since the title of Christian had not yet become well known everywhere.
 Αt any rate he bears witness especially to their abandonmentof property,and states that When they begin to follow philosophy they give up their possessionsto their relations, and then, haveing bade farewell to all the cares of life, go oubide the walls to make their dwellings in deserts and oses, 2 for the they are well aware that intercourse with those of another way is unprofitableand harmful,and it was the piacrice at that time, so it seems, of those who were thus initiated to emulate the life of the prophets in zealous and warm faith.
 For even in the canonical Acts of the Apostles it is related that all the acquaintances of the Apostles τὰ κτήματα καὶ τὰς ὑπάρξεις διαπιπράσκοντες ἐμέριζον ἅπασιν καθ’ ὃ ἄν τις χρείαν εἶχεν, ὡς μηδὲ εἶναί τινα ἐνδεῆ παρ’ αὐτοῖς·
 ὅσοι γοῦν κτήτορες χωρίων ἢ οἰκιῶν ὑπῆρχον, ὡς ὁ λόγος φησίν, πωλοῦντες ἔφερον τὰς τιμὰς τῶν πιπρασκομένων, ἐτίθεσάν τε παρὰ τοὺς πόδας τῶν ἀποστόλων, ὥστε διαδίδοσθαι ἑκάστῳ καθ’ ὅτι ἄν τις χρείαν εἶχεν.
 Τὰ παραπλήσια δὲ τούτοις μαρτυρήσας τοῖς δηλουμένοις ὁ Φίλων συλλαβαῖς αὐταῖς ἐπιφέρει λέγων·
“ πολλαχοῦ μὲν οὗν τῆς οἰκουμένης ἐστὶν τὸ γένος·
 ἔδει γὰρ ἀγαθοῦ τελείου μετασχεῖν καὶ τὴν Ἑλλάδα καὶ τὴν βάρβαρον·
 πλεονάζει δ᾿ ἐν Αἰγύπτῳ καθ’ ἕκαστον τῶν ἐπικαλουμένων νομῶν καὶ μάλιστα περὶ τὴν Ἀλεξάνδρειαν.
 οἱ δὲ πανταχόθεν ἄριστοι, καθάπερ εἰς πατρίδα θεραπευτῶν, ἀποικίαν στέλλονται πρός τι χωρίον ἐπιτηδειότατον, ὅπερ ἐστὶν ὑπὲρ λίμνης Μαρείας κείμενον ἐπὶ γεωλόφου χθαμαλωτέρου, σφόδρα εὐκαίρως ἀσφαΛείας τε ἕνεκα καὶ ἀέρος εὐκρασίας.
 ” εἶθ᾿ ἑξῆς τὰς οἰκήσεις αὐτῶν ὁποῖαί τινες ἦσαν διαγραφὰς, περὶ τῶν κατὰ χώραν ἐκκλησιῶν ταῦτά φησιν·
“ ἐν ἑκάστη δὲ οἰκίᾳ ἐστὶν οἴκημα ἱερὸν ὃ καλεῖται σεμνεῖον καὶ μοναστήριον, ἐν ᾧ μονούμενοι τὰ τοῦ σεμνοῦ βίου μυστήρια τελοῦνται, μηδὲν εἰσκομίζοντες, μὴ ποτόν, μὴ σιτίον, μηδέ τι τῶν ἄλλων ὅσα πρὸς τὰς τοῦ σώματος χρείας ἀναγκαῖα, ἀλλὰ νόμους καὶ λόγια θεσπισθέντα διὰ προφητῶν καὶ ὕμνους καὶ τἄλλα οἷς ἐπιστήμη καὶ εὐσέβεια συναύξονται καὶ τελειοῦνται.
” Καὶ μεθ’ ἕτερά φησιν·
“ Τὸ δ᾿ ἐξ ἑωθινοῦ μέχρις ἑσπέρας διάστημα sold their goods and possessions and divided them to all according as anyone had need so that none was in want among them;
 and as many as were possessors οf lands or houses, so the story says, sold them and brought the price οf what had been sold and laid it at the feetofthe Apostles,so that it might be divided to eaeh according as any had need.
 To practices like those which have been related Philo bears witness and continues in the following words:
“ The raceisfound in many placesin the world, for itwas right that both Greece and barbarism should sharein perfect good, but it abounds in Εgypt in each of the so- ealled nomes and especially around Αlexandria.
 The noblest from every region senda colony toa district well suited for their purpose, as though it were the land of the Therapeutae.
 This distriet is situated above Lake Mareia 1 ona low hill, very convenient for its safety and the temperateness οf the climate.
" Ηe then goes on to describe the nature οf their dwellings, and says this about the churches in various districts :
“ In eaeh housethere isasacred dwelling whiehis called‘a sanctuaq and,' whieh they celebrate in seclusion the mysteries of the sacred life, and bring nothing into it, either drink or food or anyofthe other things necessaryfor bodily needs, but law and inspired oraeles given by the prophets and hymns and other things by which knowledge and religion are increased and perfected.
" Αnd further on he says:
 The whole period from dawn σύμπαν αὐτοῖς ἐατιν ἄσκηαις.
 ἐντυγχάνοντες τοῖς ἱεροῖς γράμμααιν φιλοαοφοῦαιν τὴν πάτριον φιλοσοφίαν ἀλληγοροῦντες, ἐπειδὴ σύμβολα τὰ τῆς ῥητῆς ἑρμηνείας νομίζουσιν ἀπ’ ὁ κε ἀποκεκρυμμένης φύαεως, ἐν ὑπονοίαις δηλουμένης.
 ἔστι δ’ αὐτοῖς καὶ συγγράμματα παλαιῶν ἀνδρῶν, οἳ τῆς αὐτῶν ἀρχηγέται γενόμενοι, πολλὰ μνημεῖα τῆς ἐν τοῖς ἀλληγορουμένοις ἰδέας ἀπέλιπον, οἷς καθάπερ τισὶν ἀρχετύποις χρώμενοι μιμοῦνται τῆς προαιρέσεως τὸν τρόπον.
” Ταῦτα μὲν οὖν ἔοικεν εἰρῆσθαι τῷ ἀνδρὶ τὰς ἱερὰς ἐξηγουμένων αὐτῶν ἐπακροασαμένῳ γραφάς, τάχαδ’ εἰκός, ἅ φηαιν ἀρχαίων παρ’ αὐτοῖς εἶναι συγγράμματα, εὐαγγέλια καὶ τὰς τῶν γραφὰς διηγήσεις τέ τινας κατὰ τὸ εἰκὸς τῶν πάλαι προφητῶν ἑρμηνευτικάς, ὁποίας ἥ τε πρὸς Ἑβραίους καὶ ἄλλαι πλείους τοῦ Παύλου περιέχουσιν ἐπιστολαί, ταῦτ’ εἶναι.
 εἶτα πάλιν ἑξῆς περὶ τοῦ νέους αὐτοὺς ποιεῖσθαι φαλμοὺς οὕτως γράφει·
“ ὥστ' οὐ θεωροῦσι μόνον, ἀλλὰ καὶ ποιοῦσιν ᾄσματα καὶ ὕμνους εἰς τὸν θεὸν παντοίων μέτρων καὶ μελῶν ἀριθμοῖς σεμνοτέροις ἀναγκαίως χαράααοντες.
 ” Πόλλα μὲν οὖν καὶ ἄλλα περὶ ὧν ὁ λόγος, ἐν ταὐτῷ διέξειαιν, ἐκεῖναδ’ ἀναγκαῖον ἐφάνη δεῖν ἀναλέξααθαι, δι’ ὧν τὰ χαρακτηριστικὰ τῆς ἐκκλησιαστικῆς ἀγωγῆς ὑποτίθεται.
 εἰ δέ τῳ μὴ δοκεῖ τὰ εἰρημένα ἴδια εἶναι τῆς κατὰ τὸ εὐαγγέλιον πολιτείας, δύνασθαι δὲ καὶ ἄλλοις παρὰ τοὺς δεδηλωμένους ἁρμόττειν, πειθέσθω κάν ἀπὸ τῶν ἑξῆς αὐτοῦ φωνῶν, ἐν αἷς ἀναμφήριστον, εἰ εὐγνωμονοίη, κομίσεται τὴν περὶ τοῦδε to eve is for thema religious exercise;
 they study the sacred scriptures and expound their national philosophyby allegory, for they regard the literal interpretation as symbolic ofa concealed reality indicated in what is beneaththe surface.
 They have also some writings of men of old,who were the foundersof their seet, who left many memorials οf the meaning allegorically expounded, which theyuse as models and copy their method of treatment.
 This seems to have been said by a man who had listened to their expositions ofthe sacred scriptures, and it is perhaps probable that the writings of men of old, whieh he says were found among them, were the Gospels, the writingsof the Apostles, and some expositinos οf prophets after the manner of the ancients, sueh as are inthe Εpistle totheΗebrews and many οther of the epistlesof Ρaul.
 Ηe then goes on to write thus about their composition οf new psahns:
“ So that theynot οnly contemplatebut make songsand hymns to God in all kinds of metres and melodies, though they perforce arrange them in the more sacred measures.
" Ηe discusses many οther points as well in the same book, but it seemed necessary to enumerate those by whieh the charaeteristics of the life of the Church are exhibited;
 but if anyone doubt that what has been saidis peculiar to life accordingtothe gospel, and think that it can be applied to others besides those indicated, let himbe persuaded bythefollowing words of Philoin which he will find, if hebe fair, indisputable testimony on this point.
 Ηe μαρτυρίαν.
 γράφει γὰρ ὧδε·
" ἐγκράτειαν δ’ ὥαπερ τινὰ θεμέλιον προκαταβαλλόμενοι τῆ φυχῆ, τὰς ἄλλας ἐποικοδομοῦσιν ἀρετάς.
 σιτίον ἢ ποτὸν οὐδεὶς ἂν αὐτῶν προσενέγκαιτο πρὸ ἡλίου δύσεως, ἐπεὶ τὸ μὲν φιλοαοφεῖν ἄξιον φωτὸς κρίνουσιν εἶναι, ακότους δὲ τὰς τοῦ σώματος ἀνάγκας·
 ὅθεν τῷ μὲν ἡμέραν, ταῖς δὲ νυκτὸς βραχύ τι μέρος ἔνειμαν.
 ἔνιοι δὲ καὶ διὰ τριῶν ἡμερῶν ὑπομιμνῄσκονται τροφῆς, οἷς πλείων ὁ πόθος ἐπιατήμης ἐνίδρυται, τινὲς δὲ οὕτως ἐνευφραίνονται καὶ τρυφῶαιν ὑπὸ αοφίας ἐστιώμενοι πλουαίως καὶ ἀφθόνως τὰ δόγματα χορηγούσης, ὡς καὶ πρὸς διπλααίονα χρόνον ἀντέχειν καὶ μόγις δι’ ἓξ ἡμερῶν ἀπογεύεαθαι τροφῆς ἀναγκαίας, ἐθιαθέντες.
 ” Ταύτας τοῦ Φίλωνος σαφεῖς καὶ ἀναντιρρήτους περὶ τῶν καθ’ ἡμᾶς ὑπάρχειν ἡγούμεθα λέξεις.
 εἰ δ’ ἐπὶ τούτοις ἀντιλέγων τις ἔτι σκληρύνοιτο, καὶ οὗτος ἀπαλλαττέαθω τῆς δυαπιατίας, ἐναργεστέραις πειθαρχῶν ἀποδείξεσιν, ἃς οὐ παρά τισιν ἢ μόνη τῆ Χριστιανῶν εὑρεῖν ἔνεατιν κατὰ τὸ εὐαγγέλιον θρῃσκείᾳ.
 φησὶν γὰρ τοῖς περὶ ὧν ὁ λόγος καὶ γυναῖκας αυνεῖναι, ὧν αἱ πλεῖαται γηρα- λέαι παρθένοι τυγχάνουσιν, τὴν ἁγνείαν οὐκ ἀνάγκη, καθάπερ ἔνιαι τῶν παρ’ Ἕλλησιν ἱερειῶν, φυλάξασαι μᾶλλον ἢ καθ’ ἑκούαιον γνώμην, διὰ ζῆλον καὶ πόθον σοφίας, ἧ συμβιοῦν σπουδάσασαι τῶν περὶ τὸ σῶμα ἡδονῶν ἠλόγησαν, οὐ θνητῶν ἐκγόνων, ἀλλ’ ἀθανάτων ὀρεχθεῖααι, ἃ μόνη τίκτειν ἀφ’ ἑαυτῆς οἵα τέ ἐστιν ἡ θεοφιλὴς φυχή.
 εἶθ’ ὑποκαταβάς, ἐμφαντικώτερον ἐκτίθε- τᾶι ταῦτα·
 “ αἱ δ’ ἐξηγήαεις τῶν ἱερῶν γραμμάτων writes thus:
“ Having laid down for the soul continence asa foundation they build the other virtues on it.
 None of them would take food οr drink before sunset, for they think that philosophy deserves the daylight and the neceSsities οf the body darkness;
 for this reason they allot the day to the one, and a small part οf thenight to the others.
 some of them neglect food for three days for the great love of knowledge dwellingin them,and some so delight and luxuriate in thebanquetof doctrine, so richly and ungmdgingly presided overby wisdom, that they abstain for twice that time, and are accustomed scareely to taste necessary food every six days.
" we think that these wordsof Ρhilo are elear and indisputably refer to our communion.
 But if after this anyone obstinately deny it let him be converted from his scepticism and be persuaded by clearer indications which cannot be found among any, save only in the worship of Christians according to the Gospel.
 For Ρhilo says that women belong aho to those under discussion and that most οf them are aged virgins who kept their chastity from no compulsion, like someof the priestessesamong the Greeks, but rather from voluntary opinion, from zeal and yearning for wisdom, with which they desired to live, and paid no attention to bdily pleasures, longing not for mortal but for immortal children, which only the soul that loves God is eapable of bearing of itself.
 Ηe then proceedsto expound this more elearly.
“ But the interpretations of the γίνονται αὐτοῖς δι’ ὑπονοιῶν ἐν ἀλληγορίαις.
 ἅπα·
 ἄα γὰρ ἡ νομοθεαία δοκεῖ τοῖς ἀνδράσι τούτοις ἐοικέναι ζῴῳ καὶ σῶμα μὲν ἔχειν τὰς ῥητὰς δία·
 φυχὴν δὲ τὸν ἐναποκείμενον ταῖς λέξεαιν ἀόρατον νοῦν, ὃν ἤρξατο διαφερόντως ἡ οἰκία αὕτη θεωρεῖν, ὡς διὰ κατόπτρου τῶν ὀνομάτων κάλλη νοημάτων ἐμφαινόμενα κατ’·
 ιδοῦαα.
” Τί δεῖ τούτοις ἐπιλέγειν τὰς ἐπὶ ταὐτὸν αυν·
 δ’ όδους καὶ τὰς ἴδιᾳ μὲν ἄνδρων, ἴδιᾳ’ δε γυναίκων ἐν ταὐτῷ διατριβὰς καὶ τὰς ἐξ ἔθους ἔτι καὶ νῦν πρὸς ἡμῶν ἐπιτελουμένας ἀακήαεις, ἃς δια- φερούσας κάτα τὴν του σωτηρίου πάθους ἑορτὴν ἐν ἀαιτίαις καὶ διανυκτερεύσεσιν προσοχαῖς τῶν θείων λόγων ἐκτελεῖν εἰώθαμεν, ἅπερ ἐπ’:
 ἀκριβέατερον αὐτὸν ὃν καὶ εἰς δεῦρο τετήρηται παρὰ μόνοις ἡμῖν τρόπον ἐπιαημηνάμενος ὁ δηλωθεὶς ἀνὴρ τῇ ἰδίᾳ παρέδωκεν γραφῆ, τὰς τῆς μεγάλης ἑορτῆς παννυχίδας καὶ τὰς ἐν ταύταις ἀσκήαεις τούς τε λέγεσθαι εἰωθότας πρὸς ἡμῶν ὕμνους ἱατορῶν, καὶ ὡς ἑνὸς μετὰ κοσμίως ἐπιφάλλοντος οἱ λοιποὶ καθ’ ἡαυχίαν ἀκροώμενοι τῶν ὕμνων τὰ ἀκροτελεύτια συνεξηχοῦσιν, ὅπως τε κατὰ τὰς δεδηλωμένας ἡμέρας ἐπὶ ατιβάδων χαμευνοῦντες οἴνου μὲν τὸ παρά·
 πὰν, ὡς αὐτοῖς ῥήμασιν ἀνέγραφεν, οὐδ’ ἀπο- γεύονται, ἀλλ’ οὐδὲ τῶν ἐναίμων τινός, ὕδωρ δὲ μόνον αὐτοῖς ἐστι ποτόν, καὶ προαόφημα μετ’ ἄρτου ἅλες καὶ ὕσσωπον.
 πρὸς τούτοις γράφει τὸν τῆς προατααίας τρόπον τῶν τὰς ἐκκλησιαστικὰς λειτουργίας ἐγκεχειρισμένων διακονίας τε καὶ τὰς ἐπὶ πᾶσιν ἀνωτάτω τῆς ἐπιακοπῆς πρὸ- sacred scriptures are given them figuratively in allegories, for the whole law seems to these men to be likea living being;
 for a body it hasthespoken precepts, but fora soul the invisible mind underlying the words;
 and it is thiS which this Seet has begun espeeiallyto contemplate, so that in the mirror of the wordsitsees manifested surpassing beauty οf thought.
" What needis there toadd to thisadescriptionof their meetings, and of how the men live separately and the women separately in the same place, and ofthe customary exercises which are still celebrated among us, particularly those which we are accutomedto celebrate at the feastofthe Passion of the Saviourbyabstinellce from food and vigils and attention to the word οf God? The writer referred to has given in his own writinga description οf this, which exactly agrees with the manner which is still observed by us andby us alone;
 he relates the vigils for the entire night of the great feast, and the exercises during them, and the hymns which we are aecustomed to recite, and how while one sings regularly with cadenee, the rest listen in silence and join in singing only the refrain of the hymns, and how οn stated days they sleep on the ground οn straw, how they completely refrain from wine, as he expressly states, and from all kinds of Resh, drinking only water and using salt and hyssop to season their bread.
 In adffition to this he writes of the order of preeedence οf those who have been appointed to the serviceof the Church, both tothediaconate and tothesupremacy of the episcopate ἑδρίας.
 τούτων δ’ ὅτῳ πόθος ἔνεατι τῆς ἀκρὶ·
 ἐπιστάσεως, μάθοι ἂν ἐκ τῆς δηλωθείαης τοῦ ἀνδρὸς ἱστορίας·
 ὅτι δὲ τοὺς πρώτους κήρυκας τῆς κατὰ τὸ εὐαγγέλιον διδασκαλίας τά τε αρχῆθεν πρὸς τῶν ἀποατόλων ἔθη παραδεδομένα καταλαβὼν ὁ Φίλων ταῦτ’ ἔγραφεν, παντί τῳ δῆλον.
 XVIII.
 Πολύς γε μὴν τῷ λόγῳ καὶ πλατὺς ταῖς διανοίαις, ὑφηλός τε ὢν καὶ μετέωρος ἐν ταῖς εἰς τὰς θείας γραφὰς θεωρίαις γεγενημένος, ποικίλην καὶ πολύτροπον τῶν ἱερῶν λόγων πεποίηται τὴν ὑφήγησιν, τοῦτο μὲν εἱρμῷ καὶ ἀκολουθίᾳ τὴν τῶν εἰς τὴν Γένεσιν διεξελθὼν πραγματείαν ἐν οἷς ἐπέγραφεν Νόμων ἱερῶν ἀλληγορίας, τοῦτο δὲ κατὰ μέρος διαστολὰς κεφαλαίων τῶν ἐν ταῖς γραφαῖς ζητουμένων ἐπιστάαεις τε καὶ διαλύσεις πεποιημένος ἐν οἷς καὶ αὐτοῖς καταλλήλως Τῶν ἐν Γενέσει καὶ τῶν ἐν Ἐξαγωγῇ ζητημάτων καὶ λύσεων τέθειται τὴν ἐπιγραφήν.
 ἔστι δ’ αὐτῷ παρὰ ταῦτα προβλημάτων τινῶν ἰδίως πεπονημένα σπουδάσματα, οἷά ἐστι τὰ Περὶ γεωργίας καὶ τὰ Περὶ μέθης τοααῦτα, καὶ ἄλλα ἄττα διαφόρου καὶ οἰκείας ἐπιγραφῆς ἠξιωμένα, οἷος ὁ Περὶ ὧν νήφας ὁ νοῦς εὔχεται καὶ καταρᾶται καὶ Περὶ συγχύαεως τῶν διαλέκτων, καὶ ὁ Περὶ φυγῆς καὶ εὑρέαεως, καὶ ὁ Περὶ τῆς πρὸς τὰ παιδεύματα συνόδου, Περί τε τοῦ τίς ὁ τῶν θείων ἐστὶ κληρονόμος ἢ Περὶ τῆς εἰς τὰ ἴσα καὶ ἐναντία τομῆς, καὶ ἔτι τὸ Περὶ τῶν τριῶν ἀρετῶν ἃς αὺν ἄλλαις ἀνέγραφεν Μωυσῆς, πρὸς τούτοις ὁ Περὶ τῶν μετονομαζομένων καὶ ὧν ἕνεκα μετονομάζονται, ᾧ φησι αυντεταχέναι καὶ Περὶ δια- θηκῶν ἁ β΄ ἔστινδ’ αὐτοῦ καὶ Περὶ ἀποικίας at rile head over all.
 Anyone who hasa love of accurate knowledge of these things can learn from the narrative of the author quoted already, and it is plain to everyone that Philo perceived and described the first heralds of teaching according to the Gospel and the customs hand down from the beginning by the Apostles.
 XVIII.
 Philo vas rich in language andbroadin thought, sublime and elevated in his views of the divine writings, and had made various and diverse his exposition of the sacred words.
 Ηe rirst went through the subject of the events in Genesisinconnected sequence,in the book which he entitled“ The Allegories of the sacred’ ’ Ηe then made detailed arrangement into chapters of the difficulties in the Scriptures and gave their statement and solution in the books to which he gave the suitable title οf“ The Problems and Solutions in Genesis and in Exodus.
" There are, besides this, some speciallyelaborated treatises of hisoncertain problems, such as the two books“On Agriculture," and as many“Οn Drunkenness," and others with various appropriate titles, such as“ The Things which the Sober Μind desires and exercrates," “ On the confusion of Tongues,"“Οn flightand Discovery," “ ΟnAssembly for Instruction," and“ On the Question who is Heirofthe Divine Things," or“ On the Distinction betweenΟdd and Even," and further“Οn the three Virtues which Moses describes with’’ in additonto this,“ On those whosenames have been changedandwhy they where," in which he says that he has also composed BooksI.
 and II.
“ Οn the Covenants.
" There is alsoa book of his“Οn Migration and the wise life of the Man καὶ βίου σοφοῦ τοῦ κατὰ δικαιοαύνην τελειω- θέντος ἢ νόμων ἀγράφων, καὶ ἔτι Περὶ γιγάντων ἢ περὶ τοῦ μὴ τρέπεσθαι τὸ θεῖον, Περί τε τοῦ κατὰ Μωυσέα θεοπέμπτους εἶναι τοὺς ὀνείρους ἁ β΄ γ’δ’ ἑ.
 καὶ ταῦτα μὲν τὰ εἰς ἡμᾶς ἐλθόντα τῶν εἰς τὴν Γένεαιν, εἰς δὲ τὴν Ἔξοδον ἔγνωμεν αὐτοῦ Ζητημάτων καὶ Λύσεων ἁ β΄ γ’δ’ ἑ, καὶ τὸ Περὶ τῆς σκηνῆς, τό τε Περὶ τῶν δέκα λογίων, καὶ τὰ Περὶ τῶν ἀναφερομένων ἐν εἴδει νόμων εἰς τὰ συντείνοντα κεφάλαια τῶν δέκα λόγων β΄ γ’δ’, καὶ τὸ Περὶ τῶν εἰς τὰς ἱερουργίας ζῴων, καὶ τίνα τὰ τῶν θυσιῶν εἴδη, καὶ τὸ Περὶ τῶν προκειμένων ἐν τῷ νόμῳ τοῖς μὲν ἀγαθοῖς ἄθλων, τοῖς δὲ πονηροῖς ἐπιτιμίων καὶ ἀρῶν.
 πρὸς τούτοις ἅπααιν καὶ μονόβιβλα αὐτοῦ φέρεται ὡς τὸ Περὶ προνοίας, καὶ ὁ Περὶ Ἰουδαίων αὐτῷ συνταχθεὶς λόγος, καὶ ὁ Πολιτικός, ἔτι τε ὁ ἢ περὶ τοῦ λόγον ἔχειν τὰ ἄλογα ζῷα ἐπὶ τούτοις ὁ Περὶ τοῦ δοῦλον εἶναι πάντα φαῦλον, ᾧ ἑξῆς ἐστιν ὁ Περὶ τοῦ πάντα σπουδαῖον ἐλεύθερον μεθ’ οὕς συντέτακται αὐτῷ ὁ Περὶ βίου θεωρητικοῦ ἢ ἱκετῶν, ἐξ οὗ τὰ περὶ τοῦ βίου τῶν ἀποστολικῶν ἀνδρῶν διεληλύθαμεν, καὶ τῶν ἐν νόμῳ δὲ καὶ προφήταις Ἑβραϊκῶν ὀνομάτων αἱ ἑρμηνεῖαι τοῦ αὐτοῦ σπουδὴ εἶναι οὗτος μὲν οὖν κατὰ γάιον ἐπὶ τῆς Ῥώμης ἀφ’·
 ἱκόμενος, τὰ περὶ τῆς Γαϊου θεοατυγίας αὐτῷ γραφέντα, ἃ μετὰ ἤθους καὶ εἰρωνείας Περὶ ἀρετῶν ἐπέγραφεν, ἐπὶ πάσης λέγεται τῆς‘ Ρωμαίων συγκλήτου κατὰ Κλαύδιον διελθεῖν, ὡς καὶ τῆς ἐν βιβλιοθήκαις ἀναθέσεως θαυμασθέντας αὐτοῦ καταξιωθῆναι τοὺς λόγους.
 initiated into Righteousness, or Unwritten Laws," and also“ Οn Giants ortheImmutability of God," and BooksΙ.
, II.
, III.
, ΙV.
, V.
, “ Οn the Divine Origin of Dreams according to Μoses. ’
’ These are the books which have come down to us dealing with Genesis.
 Οn Exodus we know booksI.
, ΙΙ.
, III.
, ΙV.
, V.
 of his“Ρroblems and Solutions," the book“ On the Tabernacle," and that“ Οn theTen Commandments," and BooksI.
, II.
, ΙΙΙ.
, ΙV.
, “ Οn the Laws specially referrring to;
 the principal divisions of the Ten Commandments," and the book“ Οn Animalsfor Sacrifice and theVarietiesof Sacrifice," and“Οn the Rewards fixedinthe Law fortheGood and the Penaltiesand Curses for the’’ Ιn additiontoall this there are also some single volumes of his, such as the book“ Οn Providence," and the treatise composed by him“ Οn the’’ and“ The’’ moreover“ Αlexander,or that irrational animals have reason.
" Ιn additionto this the“ That every wicked man isa slave," to whichis appended the“ That every good man is free.
" Αfter these he composed the book“ Οn the Contemplative Life, or Suppliants," from which we have quoted the passages dealing with the life of the men of the Apostolic age, and the interpretations οf the Hebrew names in the Law and the Prophets are said to be his work.
 Ηe came to Rome in the time of Caius, and in the reign of Claudius is said to have read before the whole Senate of the Romans his description of the impiety of Caiu which he entitled, with fitting irony,“ Concerning Virtues," and his words were so much admired as to be granted pa lacein libraries.
 Κατὰ δὲ τούσδε τοὺς χρόνους Παύλου τὴν ἀπό Ἱερουσαλὴμ καὶ κύκλῳ πορείαν μέχρι τοῦ Ἰλλυρικοῦ διανύοντος, Ἰουδαίους ῾Ρώμης ἀπελαύνει Κλαύδιος, ὅ τε Ἀκύλας καὶ Πρίσκιλλα μετὰ τῶν ἄλλων Ἰουδαίων τῆς ῾Ρώμης ἀπαλλαγέντες ἐπὶ τὴν Ἀσίαν καταίρουσιν, ἐνταῦθά τε Παύλῳ τῷ ἀποστόλῳ συνδιατρίβουσιν, τοὺς αὐτόθι τῶν ἐκκλησιῶν ἄρτι πρὸς αὐτοῦ καταβληθέντας θεμελίους ἐπιστηρίζοντι.
 διδάσκαλος καὶ τούτων ἡ ἱερὰ τῶν Πραξέων γραφή.
 XIX.
 Ἔτι δὲ Κλαυδίου τὰ τῆς βασιλείας διέποντος, κατὰ τὴν τοῦ πάσχα ἑορτὴν τοσαύτην ἐπὶ τῶν Ἱεροσολύμων στάσιν καὶ ταραχὴν ἐγγενέσθαι συνέβη, ὡς μόνων τῶν περὶ τὰς ἐξόδους τοῦ ἱεροῦ βίᾳ συνωθουμένων τρεῖς μυριάδας Ἰουδαίων ἀποθανεῖν πρὸς ἀλλήλων καταπατηθέντων, γενέσθαι τε τὴν ἑορτὴν πένθος μὲν ὅλῳ τῷ ἔθνει, θρῆνον δὲ καθ’ ἑκάστην οἰκίαν.
 καὶ ταῦτα δὲ κατὰ λέξιν ὁ Ἰώσηπος.
 Κλαύδιος δὲ Ἀγρίππαν, Ἀγρίππου που παῖδα, Ἰουδαίων καθίστησι βασιλέα, Φήλικα τῆς χώρας ἁπάσης Σαμαρείας τε καὶ Γαλιλαίας καὶ προσέτι τῆς ἐπικαλουμένης Περαίας ἐπίτροπον ἐκπέμφας, διοικήσας δὲ αὐτὸς τὴν ἡγεμονίαν ἔτεσιν τρισὶν καὶ δέκα πρὸς μησὶν ὀκτώ, Νέρωνα τῆς ἀρχῆς διάδοχον καταλιπών, τελευτᾷ.
 XX.
 Κατὰ δὲ Νέρωνα, ῥήλικος τῆς Ἰουδαίας ἐπιτροπεύοντος, αὐτοῖς ῥήμασιν αὖθις ὁ Ἰώσηπος τὴν εἰς ἀλλήλους τῶν ἱερέων στάσιν ὧδέ πως ἐν εἰκοστῷ τῆς Ἀρχαιολογίας γράφει·
 “ Ἐξάπτεται δὲ καὶ τοῖς ἀρχιερεῦσι στάσις πρὸς τοὺς ἱερεῖς καὶ τοὺς πρώτους τοῦ πλήθους τῶν Ἱεροσολύμων, ἕκαστός τε αὐτῶν στῖφος Αt this time, while Ρaul was finishing his journey from Jerusalem and round about unto Illyricum, Claudius banished the Jews from Rome, and Aquila and Priscilla, with the other Jews, left Rome and came into Αsia, and lived there with Ρaul the Αpοstle, while he was strengthening the foundations of the churches there which had reeently been laid by him.
 The sacred Scripture of the Acts teaches this also.
 XIX.
 Νow while Claudius was still administering the Εmpire there wasa riot and confusion in Jerusalem at the feast οf the Ρassoverso great that, merely among those who were violently crowded together at the ways leading οut οf the temple, thirty thousand Jews perished by tramplinlg οn each other, and the feast was turned into mourning for the whole nation and into lamentation in each house.
 This too Josephus relates in So many words.
 Claudius appointed Agrippa, the child οf Αgrippa, as kingof the Jews, and sent out as Ρrocurator of the whole district orsamaria and Galilee, together with that called Peraea.
 Ηe had administered the government for thirteen years and eight months when he died and left Νero his successor in the sovereignty.
 XX.
 In the timeof Νerο, while Felix was Ρrocurator of Judaea, Josephus again relateS the quarrel of the priests with one another in the following words ina passage in the twentieth book οf the Antiquities:
“ Νow a quarrel arose between the Ηigh Ρriests and the priests and leaders of the people of Jerusalem.
 ἀνθρώπων τῶν θρααυτάτων καὶ νεωτεριστῶν ἐαυτῷ ποιήαας, ἡγεμὼν ἦν, καὶ συρράσσοντες ἐκακο- λόγουν τε ἀλλήλους καὶ λίθοις ἔβαλλον·
 ὁ δ’ ἐπιπλήξων ἢν οὐδὲ εἷς, ἀλλ’ ὡς ἐν ἀπροατατήτῳ πόλει ταῦτ’ ἐπράααετο μετ’ ἐξουσίας.
 τοσαύτη δὲ τοὺς ἀρχιερεῖς κατέλαβεν ἀναίδεια καὶ τόλμα, ὥστε ἐκπέμπειν δούλους ἐτόλμων ἐπὶ τὰς ἅλωνας τοὺς ληφομένους τὰς τοῖς ἱερεῦσιν ὀφειλομένας δεκάτας.
 καὶ συνέβαινε τοὺς ἀπορουμένους ἱερέων ὑπ’ ἐνδείας ἀπολλυμένους θεωρεῖν·
 οὕτως ἐκράτει τοῦ δικαίου παντὸς ἡ τῶν στασιαζόντων βία.
” Πάλιν δὲ ὁ αὐτὸς συγγραφεὺς κατὰ τοὺς αὐτοὺς χρόνους ἐν Ἱεροαολύμοις ὑποφυῆναι λῃστῶν τι εἶδος ἱατορεῖ, οἳ μεθ’ ἡμέραν, ὥς φησιν, καὶ ἐν μέσῃ τῆ πόλει ἐφόνευον τοὺς συναντῶντας.
 μάΛιστα γὰρ ἐν ταῖς ἑορταῖς μιγνυμένους τῷ πλήθει καὶ ταῖς ἐαθήαεαιν ὑποκρύπτοντας μικρὰ ξιφίδια, τούτοις νύττειν τοὺς διαφόρους·
 ἔπειτα πεαόντων, μέρος γίνεαθαι τῶν ἐπαγανακτούντων αὐτοὺς τοὺς πεφονευκότας·
 διὸ καὶ παντάπααιν ὑπ’ ἀξιοπιατίας ἀνευρέτους γενέσθαι.
 πρῶτον μὲν οὖν ὑπ’ αὐτῶν Ἰωνάθην τὸν ἀρχιερέα κατασφαγῆναι, μετὰ δ’ αὐτὸν καθ’ ἡμέραν ἀναιρεῖαθαι πολλούς, καὶ τῶν συμφορῶν τὸν φόβον χαλεπώτερον, ἑκάστου καθάπερ ἐν πολέμῳ καθ’ ὥραν τὸν θάνατον προαδεχομένου.
 ΧΧΙ.
 Ἑξῆς δὲ τούτοις ἐπιφέρει μεθ’ ἕτερα λέγων·
 “ μείζονι δὲ τούτων πληγῇ Ἰουδαίους ἐκάκωσεν ὁ Αἰγύπτιος φευδοπροφήτης.
 παραγενόμενος γὰρ εἰς τὴν χώραν ἄνθρωπος γόης καὶ προφήτου πίστιν ἐπιθεὶς ἑαυτῷ, περὶ τρισμυρίους μὲν ἀθροίζει Εach of them made for himself a band of the boldest revolutionaries, of which he was the leader, and when they met they used to abuse each other and throw stones.
 There was nota single oneto rebuke this, but itwas done with licence as though in a city without government.
 sueh shamelessness and audacity seized the Ηigh Priests that they ventured to Send salves to the threshing- floors to take the tithes owedtothe prierts, and it wasa common occurrenceto see destitute priests perishing of want.
 Thus the violence of the factions conquered all justice.
" The same writer again relates that at thesame time a certain kind of banditsarosein Jerusalem, who, as he says, murdered daily thosewhom they met, even in the midst of the city.
 In particular at the feasts they used to mingle with the crowd and concealing short daggers in their clothes used to Stab distinguished people with them;
 then, when theyhad fallen,the murderers themselves shared in the indignation.
 In this way they evaded discovery through the conhdence generally plaeed in them.
 Jonathan the Ηigh Priest was the first to beslainby them, but afterhim many were murdered daily, and fear was worse than the disasters, for as if in war every man was hourly expecting death.
 XXI.
 Ηe continues his narrative after οther details as follows:
:
“ The Εgyprian false prophet affiicted the Jews with a worse scourge than this, for this man appeared in the country asa sorcerer and secured for himself the faith due toa prophet.
 Ηe assembled about thirty thousand who had been deceived and τῶν ἠπατημένων, περιαγαγὼν δ’ αὐτοὺς ἐκ τῆς ἐρημίας εἰς τὸ Ἐλαιῶν καλούμενον ὄρος, ἐκεῖθεν οἷός τε ἢν εἰς Ἱεροαόλυμα παρελθεῖν βιάζεσθαι καὶ κρατήσας τῆς τε Ῥωμαϊκῆς φρουρᾶς καὶ τοῦ δήμου τυραννικῶς χρώμενος τοῖς συνεισπεσοῦσιν δορυφόροις.
 φθάνει δ’ αὐτοῦ τὴν ὁρμὴν Φῆλιξ, ὑπαντιάσας μετὰ τῶν Ῥωμαϊκῶν ὁπλι- καὶ πᾶς ὁ δῆμος συνεφήψατο τῆς ὥστε συμβολῆς γενομένης τὸν μὲν φυγεῖν μετ’ ὀλίγων, διαφθαρῆναι δὲ καὶ ζωγρηθῆναι πλείστους τῶν σὺν αὐτῷ.
” Ταῦτα ἐν τῆ δευτέρᾳ τῶν Ἱατοριῶν ὁ Ἰώσηπος·
 ἐπιστῆσαι δὲ ἄξιον τοῖς ἐνταῦθα κατὰ τὸν Αἰγύπτιον δεδηλωμένοις καὶ τοῖς ἐν ταῖς Πράξεσι τῶν ἀποατόλων, ἔνθα κατὰ Φήλικα πρὸς τοῦ ἐν Ἱεροσολύμοις χιλιάρχου εἴρηται τῷ Παύλῳ, ὅπη·
 νίκα κατεστασίαζεν αὐτοῦ τὸ τῶν Ἰουδαίων πλῆθος·
“ οὐκ ἄρα αὖ εἶ ὁ Αἰγύπτιος ὁ πρὸ τούτων τῶν ἡμερῶν ἀναατατώαας καὶ ἐξαγαγὼν ἐν τῇ ἐρήμῳ τοὺς τετρακιαχιλίους ἄνδρας τῶν αικαρίων; ’
’ ἀλλὰ τὰ μὲν κατὰ Φήλικα τοιαῦτα.
 XXII.
 τούτου δὲ Φῆατος ὑπὸ Νέρωνος διάδοχος;
 27.
 1 πέμπεται, καθ’ ὃν δικαιολογησάμενος ὁ Παῦλος δέαμιος ἐπὶ Ρώμης ἄγεται·
 Ἀρίσταρχος αὐτῷ συνῆν, ὃν καὶ εἰκότως συναιχμάλωτόν που ἐπιστολῶν ἀποκαλεῖ.
 καὶ Λουκᾶς, ὁ καὶ τὰς πράξεις τῶν ἀποστόλων γραφῇ παραδούς, ἐν τούτοις κατέλυαε τὴν ἱστορίαν, διετίαν ὅλην ἐπὶ τῆς Ρώμης τὸν Παῦλον ἄνετον διατρῖφαι καὶ τὸν τοῦ θεοῦ λόγον ἀκωλύτως κηρῦξαι ἐπισημηνάμενος.
 τότε μὲν οὖν ἀπολογησάμενον, αὗθις ἐπὶ τὴν τοῦ κηρύγματος διακονίαν λόγος ἔχει led them round from the wilderness to the mount called Olivet, where hewasina position to force an entry into Jerusalem and overpower the Roman garison and the people bya despotic useof the soldiers who had joined him.
 But Felix, anticipating his attaek, met him with the Roman forces, and all the people agreed in rile defenee, so that when battle was joined the Egyptian fled with a few men and the greater part of those with him were destroyed or captured.
" Josepohus relates this in the second bookof the Wars, but itis worth nothing whatis said abouttheEgyptian there and in the Acts or the Apostles, where, in the time of Felix, the centurion at Jerusalemsaid to Ρaul, when the mob of the Jews was rioting against him,“ Αrt thou not that Egyptianwho before these days made an uprorar and led out in the wilderness four thousand men of the Sicarii 1?’’ Such wasthe course of events under Felix.
 XXII.
 Festus was sent as his successor by Νero, and Ρaul was tried before him and taken as a prisoner to Rome;
 Αristarchus was with him, and he naturally called himhis fellow- prisoner inapassage in tlle Epistles.
 Luke also, who committedthe Acts of the Apostles to writing, finished his narrative at this point by the statement that Ρaul spent two whole years in Rome in freedom, and preachedthe word of God without hindrance.
 Trdition has it that after derending himelf the Apostle was again sent στείλασθαι τὸν ἀπόατολον, δεύτερον δ’ τῆ αὐτῇ πόλει τῷ κατ’ αὐτὸν τελειωθῆναι μαρτυρίῳ·
 ἐν ῷ δεαμοῖς ἐχόμενος, τὴν πρὸς Τιμόθεον δευτέραν ἐπιατολὴν συντάττει, ὁμοῦ σημαίνων τε προτέραν αὐτῷ γενομένην ἀπολογίαν καὶ τὴν παρὰ πόδας τελείωσιν.
 δέχου δὴ καὶ:
 τούτων τὰς αὐτοῦ μαρτυρίας·
 “ ἐν τῆ πρώτῃ μου,’’ φηαίν,“ ἀπολογίᾳ οὐδείς μοι παρεγένετο, ἀλλὰ πάντες με ἐγκατέλιπον μὴ αὐτοῖς λογισθείη), ὁ δὲ κύριός μοι παρέατη καὶ ἐνεδυνάμωσέν με, ἵνα δι’ ἐμοῦ τὸ κήρυγμα πληροφορηθῇ καὶ ἀκούσωσι πάντα τὰ ἔθνη, καὶ ἐρρύαθην ἐκ στόματος λέοντος.’
 ’ σαφῶς δὴ παρίστηαιν διὰ τούτων ὅτι δὴ τὸ πρότερον, ὡς ἂν τὸ κήρυγμα τὸ δι’ αὐτοῦ πληρωθείη, ἐρρύαθη ἐκ στόματος τὸν Νέρωνα ταύτῃ, ὡς ἔοικεν, διὰ τὸ ὠμό- θυμον προαειπών.
 οὔκουν ἑξῆς προατέθεικεν παραπλήσιόν τι τῷ“ ῥύσεταί με ἐκ στόματος λέοντος·’
’ ἑώρα γὰρ τῷ πνεύματι τὴν δάον οὔπω μέλλουααν αὐτοῦ τελευτήν, δι’ ὅ φησιν ἐπιλέγων τῷ“ καὶ ἐρρύσθην ἐκ στόματος λέοντος’’ ρύσεταί με ὁ κύριος ἄπο παντὸς ἔργου πονηροῦ καὶ σώσει εἰς τὴν βασιλείαν αὐτοῦ τὴν νιον, σημαίνων τὸ παραυτίκα μαρτύριον·
 ὃ καὶ σαφέστερον ἐν τῆ αὐτῇ προλέγει φάακων“ ἐγὼ γὰρ ἤδη σπένδομαι, καὶ ὁ καιρὸς τῆς ἐμῆς ἀναλύσεως ἐφέατηκεν.’
 ’ 1 νῦν μὲν οὖν ἑ ἐπὶ τῆς δευτέρας ἐπιστολῆς τῶν πρὸς Τιμόθεον τὸν Λοῦκαν μόνον γράφοντι αὐτῷ συνεῖναι κατὰ δὲ τὴν προτέραν ἀπολογίαν οὐδὲ τοῦτον·
 ὅθεν εἰκότως τὰς τῶν ἀποατόλων Πραξεῖς ἐπ’ οn theministryof preaching, and cominga second timeto the same city suffered martyrdom under Νerο.
 During this imprisonment he wrote the second Εpistle to Timothy, indicating at the same time that his first defence had taken place and that his martyrdom was at hand.
 Νοtice his testimony on this point:
“ Αt my first defence," he says, “ no man was with me, but all deserted me( may itnotbe laid totheir charge), but the Lord stood by me and strengthened me that the preaching might be fuh filled by me and all the Gentiles might hear, andIwas delivered from the lion's mouth.
" Ηe clearly provesby this thatonthe first occasion, in order that the praching which took place through him might be fulmled, he was delivered from the lion's mouth, apparently referring to Νero thus for his feroeity.
 Ηe does notgo on toaddany such wordsas“ he will deliverme from the lion's mouth," for hesawin the spirit thathis death wasallbut at hand,wherefore after the words“ And 1 was delivered from the lion's mouth," he goes on to say,“ The Lord willdeliver me fromall evil and save me for his heavenly kingdom," indicating his impending martrydom.
 Αnd this he foretells even more clearly in the samewriting, saying,“ Forἴ’ am already offeredupand the timeofmy release is at hand.
" Νοw in the second Epistle of those to Timothy, he states that only Luke was with him as he wrote, and at his Rrst defence not even he;
 wherefore Luke probably wrote the Αcts of the Apostles at that time, carrying ἐκεῖνον ὁ Λουκᾶς περιέγραφε τὸν χρόνον, τὴν μέχρις ὅτε τῷ Παύλῳ συνῆν ἱστορίαν ὑφηγησάμενος.
 ταῦτα δ’ ἡμῖν εἴρηται παρισταμένοις ὅτι μὴ καθ’ ἢν ὁ Λουκᾶς ἀνέγραφεν ἐπὶ τῆς Ῥώμης ἐπιδημίαν τοῦ Παύλου τὸ μαρτύριον αὐτῷ οὑν.
 ἐπεράνθη·
 εἰκός γέ τοι κατὰ μὲν ἀρχὰς ἠπιώτερον τοῦ Νέρωνος διακειμένου, ῥᾷον τὴν ὑπὲρ τοῦ δόγματος τοῦ Παύλου καταδεχθῆναι ἀπολογίαν, προελθόντος δ’ εἰς ἀθεμίτους τόλμας, μετὰ τῶν ὤων καὶ τὰ κατὰ τῶν ἀποστόΛων ἐγχειρηθῆναι.
 ΧΧΙΙΙ.
 Ἰουδαῖοί γε μὴν τοῦ Παύλου Καίσαρα ἐπικαλεσαμένου ἐπί τε τὴν‘ Ρωμαίων πόλιν ὑπό Φήστου παραπεμφθέντος, τῆς ἐλπίδος καθ’ ἢν ἐξῆρ’·
 τυον αὐτῷ τὴν ἐπιβουλήν, ἀποπεαόντες, ἐπὶ Ἰάκωβον τὸν τοῦ κυρίου τρέπονται ἀδελφόν, ᾧ πρὸς τῶν ἀποατόλων ὁ τῆς ἐπισκοπῆς τῆς ἐν Ἱεροσολύμοις ἐγκεχείριστο θρόνος.
 τοιαῦτα δὲ αὐτοῖς καὶ τὰ κατὰ τούτου τολμᾶται.
 εἰς μέσον αὐτόν ἄγα.
 γόντες ἄρνησιν τῆς εἰς τὸν χριστὸν πίστεως ἐπὶ παντὸς ἐξῄτουν τοῦ λαοῦ·
 τοῦ δὲ παρὰ τὴν ἄπαγ’ γνώμην ἐλευθέρᾳ φωνὴ καὶ μαλλοῦ ἢ προσεδόκησαν ἐπὶ τῆς πληθύος ἅπας παρρησία.
 εοοκησαν επι της πληυυος απασης παρρησια απασης καὶ ὁμολογήααντος υἱὸν εἶναι θεοῦ σωτῆρα καὶ κύριον ἡμῶν’ Iηαοῦν, μηκέθ’ οἷοί τε τὴν τοῦ ἀνδρὸς μαρτυρίαν φέρειν τῷ καὶ δι’.
 καιότατον αὐτὸν παρὰ τοῖς πᾶσιν δι’ ἀκρότητα ἧς μετῄει κατὰ τὸν βίον φιλοσοφίας τε καὶ θεοσεβείας κτείνουσι, καιρὸν εἰς ἐξουσίαν λαβόντες τὴν ἀναρχίαν, ὅτι δὴ τοῦ Φήστου κατ’ αὐτὸ τοῦ καιροῦ ἐπὶ τῆς Ἰουδαίας τελευτή.
 σαντος, ἄναρχα καὶ ἀνεπιτρόπευτα τὰ τῆς αὐτόθι διοικήσεως καθειστήκει.
 τὸν δὲ τῆς τοῦ Ἰακώ.
 down his narratiVe until the time when he was with Ρaul.
 We have said this to show that Paul 's martyrdom was not accomplished during the sojourn in Rome which Luke describes.
 Ρrobably at the beginning Νero’s disposition was genrier and it was easierfor Ρaul’s defenceon behalf of his viewstobe received, but ashe advanced towards reckless crime the Apostles were attacked along with the rest.
 XIII.
 When Ρaul appealed to eaesar and was sent over to Rome by Festus the Jews were disappointed of the hope in which they had laid their plot against him and turned against James, the brotherof the Lord, to whom the throne of the bishopric in Jerisalem had been allotted by the Apostles.
 The crim which they committed wasas follows.
 They brought him into the midst and demandeda denial of the faith in Christ before all the people,but When he, contrary to the expectation of all of them, with aloud voice and with more courage than they had expected, confessed beforeall the people that our Lord and Saviour Jesus Christ is the son of God.
 they could no longer endure his testimony, since he was by all menbelievedto be most righteous beeause of the height which he had reached ina life of philosophy and religion, and killed him, using anarchy as an opportunity for power since at that moment Festus had died in Judaea, leaving the district without government or procurator.
 The manner of Βοῦ τελευτῆς τρόπον ἤδη μὲν πρότερον αἱ παρα- τεθεῖσαι τοῦ Κλήμεντος φωναὶ δεδηλώκασιν, ἀπὸ τοῦ πτερυγίου βεβλῆσθαι ξύλῳ τε τὴν πρὸς θάνατον πεπλῆχθαι αὐτὸν ἱστορηκότος·
 ἀκριβέατατά γε μὴν τὰ κατ’ αὐτὸν ὁ Ἡγήαιππος, ἐπὶ τῆς πρώτης τῶν ἀποατόλων γενόμενος διαδοχῆς, ἐν τῷ πέμπτῳ αὐτοῦ ὑπομνήματι τοῦτον λέγων ἱστορεῖ τὸν τρόπον·
 Διαδέχεται τὴν ἐκκληαίαν μετὰ τῶν ἀποστόλων ὁ ἀδελφὸς τοῦ κυρίου Ἰάκωβος, ὁ ὀνομααθεὶς ὑπὸ πάντων δίκαιος ἀπὸ τῶν τοῦ κυρίου χρόνων μέχρι καὶ ἡμῶν, ἐπεὶ πολλοὶ Ἰάκωβοι ἐκαλοῦντο, οὗτος δὲ ἐκ κοιλίας μητρὸς αὐτοῦ ἅγιος ἢν, οἶνον καὶ σίκερα οὐκ ἔπιεν οὐδὲ ἔμφυχον ἔφαγεν, ξυρὸν ἐπὶ τὴν κεφαλὴν αὐτοῦ οὐκ ἀνέβη, ἔλαιον οὐκ ἠλείφατο, καὶ βαλανείῳ ἴῳ οὐκ ἐχρήσατο.
 τούτῳ μόνῳ ἐξῆν εἰς τὰ ἅγια εἰαιέναι·
 οὐδὲ γὰρ ἐρεοῦν ἐφόρει, ἀλλὰ σινδόνας.
 καὶ μόνος εἰαήρχετο εἰς τὸν ναὸν ηὑρίακετό τε κείμενος ἐπὶ τοῖς γόνασιν καὶ αἰτούμενος ὑπὲρ τοῦ λαοῦ ἄφεσιν, ὡς ἀπεσκληκέναι τὰ γόνατα αὐτοῦ δίκην καμήλου, διὰ τὸ ἀεὶ κάμπτειν ἐπὶ γόνυ προσκυνοῦντα τῷ θεῷ καὶ αἰτεῖαθαι ἄφεσιν τῷ λαῷ.
 διά γέ τοι τὴν ὑπερβολὴν τῆς δικαιοσύνης αὐτοῦ ἐκαλεῖτο ὁ δίκαιος καὶ ὠβλίας, ὅ ἐατιν Ἑλληνιστὶ περιοχὴ τοῦ λαοῦ, καὶ δικαιοαύνη, ὡς οἱ προφῆται δηλοῦσιν περὶ αὐτοῦ.
 τινὲς οὗν τῶν ἑπτὰ αἱρέσεων τῶν ἐν τῷ λαῷ, τῶν’π’ προγεγραμμένων μοι ἐν τοῖςv.
 Ὑπομνήμασιν), ἐπυνθάνοντο αὐτοῦ τίς ἡ θύρα τοῦ Ἰηαοῦ, καὶ ἔλεγεν τοῦτον εἶναι τὸν σωτῆρα·
 ἐξ ὧν τινες ἐπίατευααν ὅτι Ἰησοῦς ἐατιν ὁ Χριστός.
 δὲ αἱρέσεις αἱ προειρημέναι οὐκ ἐπί·
 στευον οὔτε ἀνάστασιν οὔτε ἐρχόμενον ἀποδοῦναι James's death has been Shown by the words of Clement already quoted, narrating thathewas thrown fromthe battlement and beaten to death witha club, but Hegesippus, who belongs to the generation after the Apostles, gives the most aceurate aeeount of him Speaking as follows in his fifth book:
“ The chargeofthe Church passedto James the brotherof the Lord, together with the Αpostles.
 Ηe was called the‘ Just’ by allmenfromthe Lord's time to ours, since manyare called James, but he was holy from his mother's womb.
 Ηe drank no wine or strong drink, nor didhe eat flesh;
 no razor went upon his head;
 he did not anointhimselfwith oil, and he did not go to the baths.
 Ηe alone was allowed to enter into the sanctuary for he did not wear wool but linen, and he used to enter alone into the temple and be found kneeling and praying for forgiveness for the people, so that his knees grew hard like a camel's because of his constantworshipof God, kneeling and asking forgiveness for the people.
 so from his excessive righteousness he was ealled the Just and Oblias, that isin Greek,‘ Rampart of the peopleand righteousness,’ as the prophets deelare concerning him.
 Thus Some of the seven sectS among the people,who were desribed before by me( in the Commentaries), inquired ofhim what wasthegate of Jesus,’ and he said that hewasthe saviour.
 Owing to this some believed that Jesuswasthe Chrirt.
 The sects mentioned above did not believe either in resurrection or in one who shall ἑκάατῳ κατὰ τὰ ἔργα αὐτοῦ·
 ὅσοι δὲ καὶ ἐπίατευααν, διὰ Ἰάκωβον.
 πολλῶν οὗν καὶ τῶν ἀρχόντων πιατευόντων, ἢν θόρυβος τῶν Ἰουδαίων καὶ γραμματέων καὶ Φαρισαίων λεγόντων ὅτι κινδυνεύει πᾶς ὁ λαὸς Ἰηαοῦν τὸν χριστὸν προσδοκᾶν.
 ἔλεγον οὗν συνελθόντες τῷ Ἰακώβῳ·
 παρακαλοῦμέν ἄε, ἐπίσχες τὸν λαόν, ἐπεὶ ἐπλανήθη εἰς Ἰηαοῦν, ὡς αὐτοῦ ὄντος τοῦ χριστοῦ.
 παρακαλοῦμέν ἄε πεῖσαι πάντας τοὺς ἐλθόντας εἰς τὴν ἡμέραν τοῦ πάσχα περὶ Ἰησοῦ·
 ἀοῖ γὰρ πάντες πειθόμεθα.
 ἡμεῖς γὰρ μαρτυροῦμέν σοι καὶ πᾶς ὁ λαὸς ὅτι δίκαιος εἶ καὶ ὅτι πρόσωπον οὐ λαμβάνεις.
 πεῖαον οὖν αὖ τὸν ὄχλον περὶ Ιησοῦ μὴ πλανᾶαθαι·
 καὶ γὰρ πᾶς ὁ λαὸς καὶ πάντες πειθόμεθά σοι.
 στῆθι οὗν ἐπὶ τὸ πτερύγιον τοῦ ἱεροῦ, ἵνα ἄνωθεν ἦς ἐπιφανὴς καὶ ἢ εὐάκουστά σου τὰ ῥήματα παντὶ τῷ λαῷ.
 διὰ γὰρ τὸ πάσχα συνεληλύθααι πᾶσαι αἱ φυλαὶ μετὰ καὶ τῶν ἐθνῶν. ’
 ἔστησαν οὖν οἱ πρὸ.
 εἰρημένοι γραμματεῖς καὶ Φαριααῖοι τὸν Ἰάκωβον ἐπὶ τὸ πτερύγιον τοῦ ναοῦ, καὶ ἔκραξαν αὐτῷ καὶ εἶπαν‘ δίκαιε, ᾧ πάντες πείθεσθαι ὀφείλομεν, ἐπεὶ ὁ λαὸς πλανᾶται ὀπίσω Ἰησοῦ τοῦ σταυρω- θέντος, ἀπάγγειλον ἡμῖν τίς ἡ θύρα τοῦ Ἰηαοῦ.’
 καὶ ἀπεκρίνατο φωνῇ μεγάλη‘ τί με ἐπερωτᾶτε περὶ τοῦ υἱοῦ τοῦ ἀνθρώπου, καὶ αὐτὸς κάθηται ἐν τῷ οὐρανῷ ἐκ δεξιῶν τῆς μεγάλης δυνάμεως, καὶ μέλλει ἔρχεσθαι ἐπὶ τῶν νεφελῶν τοῦ οὐ- ρανοῦ;’
 καὶ πολλῶν πληροφορηθέντων καὶ δοξαζόντων ἐπὶ τῆ μαρτυρίᾳ τοῦ Ἰακώβου καὶ come to reward each accordingto his deeds, but as many as believed did so because of James.
 Νow, since many even of the rulers believved, there wasa saying that the whole people was in danger of looking for Jesusa the christ.
 So they assembled and said since they are straying after Jesus as though he were the Messiah.
 We beseech youto persuade concerning Jesus all who come for the day of the Passover, over, all obey you.
 For we and the whole people testify to you that you are righteous and do not respect persons.
 cso do you persuade the crowd not toerr concerning Jesus, for the whole people and we all obey you.
 Therefore stand on the battlementof and that your words may be audible toall the people, for because of the Passover all the tribe, with the Gentiles also, have come’ so the scribesand Pharisees mentioned before made James stand on the battlementofthe temple,and they cried outtohim and said, Oh, jsut one, to whom we all owe obeffience, since the people are straying after Jesus who was crucified, tell us what is the gate of Jesus? 7.
 1’ Αnd he answered witha loud voice,‘ Why do you askme concerning the son of Man? Ηe iS sitting in heaven on the right hand of the great power, and he will come on the clouds of haven.’
 Αnd many wereconvinced and confessed2 at the testimony of λεγόντων‘ ὡσαννὰ τῷ υἱῷ Δαυίδ,’ τότε πάλιν οἱ αὐτοὶ γραμματεῖς καὶ Φαριααῖοι πρὸς ὠή·
 λους ἔλεγον‘ κακῶς ἐποιήααμεν τοιαύτην μαρτυρίαν παρααχόντες τῷ Ἰησοῦ·
 ἀλλὰ ἀναβάντες καταβάλωμεν αὐτόν, ἵνα φοβηθέντες μὴ πιστεύσωσιν αὐτῷ.’
 καὶ ἔκραξαν λέγοντεςἴ’ ὢ ὤ, καὶ ὁ δίκαιος ἐπλανήθη, ’ καὶ ἐπλήρωσαν τὴν γραφὴν τὴν ἐν τῷ Ἡσαΐᾳ γεγραμμένηνἴ’ τὸν δίκαιον, ὅτι δύαχρηατος ἡμῖν ἐστιν·
 τοίνυν τὰ γενήματα τῶν ἔργων αὐτῶν φάγονται.’
 ἀναβάντες οὖν κατέβαλον τὸν δίκαιον.
 καὶ ἔλεγον ἀλλήλοις λιθάσωμεν Ἰάκωβον τὸν δίκαιον,’ καὶ ἤρξαντο λιθάζειν αὐτόν, ἐπεὶ καταβληθεὶς οὐκ ἀπέθανεν·
 ἀλλὰ στραφεὶς ἔθηκε τὰ γόνατα λέγων παρακαλῶ, κύριε θεὲ πάτερ, ἄφες αὐτοῖς·
 οὐ γὰρ οἴδασιν τί ποιοῦσιν. ’
 οὕτως δὲ κάτα·
 λιθοβολούντων αὐτόν, εἷς τῶν ἱερέων τῶν υἱῶν Ῥηχὰβ υἱοῦ Ῥαχαβείμ, τῶν μαρτυρουμένων ὑπὸ Ἱερεμίου τοῦ προφήτου, ἔκραξεν λέγων παύσασθε·
 τί ποιεῖτε;
 εὔχεται ὑπὲρ ὑμῶν ὁ δίκαιος.’
 καὶ λαβών τις ἀπ’ αὐτῶν, εἷς τῶν γναφέων, τὸ ξύλον, ἐν ᾧ ἀποπιέζει τὰ ἱμάτια, ἤνεγκεν κατὰ τῆς κεφαλῆς τοῦ δικαίου, καὶ οὕτως ἐμαρτύρησεν.
 καὶ ἔθαφαν αὐτὸν ἐπὶ τῷ τόπῳ παρὰ τῷ ναῷ, καὶ ἔτι αὐτοῦ ἡ στήλη μένει παρὰ τῷ ναῷ.
 μάρτυς οὗτος ἀληθὴς Ἰουδαίοις τε καὶ Ἕλλησιν γεγένηται ὅτι Ἰησοῦς ὁ χριατός ἐστιν.
 καὶ εὐθὺς Οὐεαπασιανὸς πολιορκεῖ αὐτούς.
 ” 1 James and said,‘ Hosanna to the son of Then again the same seribes and Ρharisees said to one another, ‘ We did wrong to provide Jesus with such testimony, but letus go upandthrow him down that theymaybe afraid and not believe him.
 Αnd they cried out saying,‘ Oh, oh, even the just one’ Αnd they fulfilled the Scripture written in Isaiah, 1‘Let us takethe just manforhe is unprofitableto us.
 Yet they shall eat the fruit of their works.
' So they wentup and threwdownthe Just, and they said to one another,‘ Let us stone James the’ and they begantostone him sincethe fall hadnot killed him, but he turned and knelt saying,‘I beseech thee, Ο·
 Lord, God and Father, forgive them, for they know not what they’ Αnd while they were thus stoning him one of the priests of the sons of Reehab, the son of Rechabim,2 to whom Jeremiahtheprophet bore witness, cried out saying,‘ Stop! what areyoudoing?The Just is praying for’ Αnd a certainman among them, one of the laundrymen, took the club with which he used to beat out the clothes, and hitthe Jurt onthe head, and so he suffered martyrdom.
 Αnd they buried him on the spot bythe temple,and his gravestone stone still remains by the temple.
 He beeameatrue witness both to Jews and to Greeks that Jesus is the Chrisband at once Vespasian began to beriege them.
" Ταῦτα διὰ πλάτους, συνῳδά γέ τοι τῷ Κλήμεντι καὶ ὁ Ἡγήσιππος.
 οὕτω δὲ ἄρα θαυμάσιός τις ἦν καὶ παρὰ τοῖς ἄλλοις ἅπασιν ἐπὶ δικαιοσύνῃ βεβόητο ὁ Ἰάκωβος, ὡς καὶ τοὺς Ἰουδαίων ἔμφρονας δοξάζειν ταύτην εἶναι τὴν αἰτίαν τῆς παραχρῆμα μετὰ τὸ μαρτύριον αὐτοῦ πολιορκίας τῆς ἱερουσαλήμ, ἢν δι’ οὐδὲν ἕτερον αὐτοῖς συμβῆναι ἢ διὰ τὸ κατ’ αὐτοῦ τολμηθὲν ἄγος.
 Ἀμέλει γέ τοι ὁ Ἰώσηπος οὐκ ἀπώκνησεν καὶ 2 τοῦτ᾿ ἐγγράφως ἐπιμαρτύρασθαι δι’ ὧν φησιν λέξεων “ ταῦτα δὲ συμβέβηκεν Ἰουδαίοις κατ’ ἐκδίκησιν Ἰακώβου τοῦ δικαίου, ὃς ἦν ἀδελφὸς Ἰησοῦ τοῦ λεγομένου Χριστοῦ, ἐπειδήπερ δικαιότατον αὐτὸν ὄντα οἱ Ἰουδαῖοι ἀπέκτειναν.
 ” Ὁ δ᾿ αὐτὸς καὶ τὸν θάνατον αὐτοῦ ἐν εἰκοστῷ 2 τῆς Ἀρχαιολογίας δηλοῖ διὰ τούτων·
 “ πέμπει δὲ Καῖσαρ Ἀλβίνον εἰς τὴν Ἰουδαίαν ἔπαρχον, Φήστου τὴν τελευτὴν πυθόμενος.
 ὁ δὲ νεώτερος Ἄνανος, ὅν τὴν ἀρχιερωσύνην εἴπαμεν παρειληφέναι, θρασὺς ἦν τὸν τρόπον καὶ τολμητὴς διαφερόντως, αἵρεσιν δὲ μετῄει τὴν Σαδδουκαίων, οἵπερ εἰσὶ περὶ τὰς κρίσεις ὠμοὶ παρὰ πάντας τοὺς Ἰουδαίους, καθὼς ἤδη δεδηλώκαμεν.
 ἅτε 2(??) δὴ οὖν τοιοῦτος ὢν ὁ Ἄνανος, νομίσας ἔχειν καιρὸν ἐπιτήδειον διὰ τὸ τεθνάναι μὲν Φῆστον, Ἀλβῖνον δ᾿ ἔτι κατὰ τὴν ὁδὸν ὑπάρχειν, καθίξει συνέδριον κριτῶν, καὶ παραγαγὼν εἰς αὐτὸ τὸν ἀδελφὸν Ἰησοῦ, τοῦ Χριστοῦ λεγομένου, Ἰάκωβος ὄνομα αὐτῷ, καί τινας ἑτέρους, ὡς παρανομησάντων κατηγορίαν ποιησάμενος, παρέδωκεν λευσθησομένους.
 ὅσοι δὲ ἐδόκουν ἐπιεικέστατοι τῶν κατὰ τὴν πόλιν εἶναι καὶ τὰ περὶ τοὺς νόμους This account is given at length by Hegesippus, but in agreement with Clement.
 Thus it seems that James was indeed a remarkable man and ramous among all for righteousness, so that the wise even οf the Jews thought that this was the cause of the siege of Jemsalem immediately after his martyrdom, and thatit happened for no other reason than the crime which they had committed against him.
 of course Josephus did not shrink from giving written testimonyp to this,as follows:
“ And theSe things happened to the Jews to avenge JameS the Just, who wasthe brother of Jesus the so- called christ, for the Jews killed him in spite of his great righteousness.
" 1 The same writer also narrates his death in the twentieth book of the Antiquities as follows:
“ Νow when Caesar heard οf the death of Festus he sent Albinus as governorto Judaea, but the younger Αnanus, who, as we said, had received the Ηigh Priesthood, was boldin temperament and remarkably daring.
 Ηe followed the Seetofthe sadducees,who are cruel in their judgements beyond all the Jews, as we have already explained.
 nus his eharacter led Αnanus to think that he hada suitable opportunity through the faet that Festus was dead and Albinus still on his way.
 Ηe sum- monedacouncil of judges, brought beforeit the brotherof Jesus, the so- ealled Christ, whose name was James,and some otherS, on the accusation of breaking the law and delivered them to be stoned.
 But all who were reputed the most reasonable of the citizens and strict observers of the law were ἀκριβεῖς, βαρέως ἤνεγκαν ἐπὶ τούτῳ, καὶ πέμ- πουσι πρὸς τὸν βασιλέα κρύφα, παρακαλοῦντες αὐτὸν ἐπιατεῖΛαι τῷ Ἀνάνῳ μηκέτι τοιαῦτα πράααειν·
 μηδὲ γὰρ τὸ πρῶτον ὀρθῶς αὐτὸν πεποιηκέναι.
 τινὲς δ’ αὐτῶν καὶ τὸν Ἀλβῖνον πεποιηκέναι.
 ἀπὸ τῆς Ἀλεξανδρείας ὁδοιπο- ροῦντα, καὶ διδάακουαιν ὡς οὐκ ἐξὸν ἢν Ἀνάνῳ χωρὶς αὐτοῦ γνώμης καθίσαι συνέδριον.
 Ἀλβῖνος δὲ πειαθεὶς τοῖς λεγομένοις, γράφει μετ’ ὀργῆς τῷ Ἀνάνῳ, λήφεαθαυ παρ’ αὐτοῦ δίκας ἀπειλῶν, καὶ ὁ βασιλεὺς Ἀγρίππας διὰ τοῦτο τὴν ἀρχιερωσύνην ἀφελόμενος αὐτοῦ ἄρξαντος μῆνας τρεῖς, Ἰησοῦν τὸν τοῦ Δαμμαίου κατέατηαεν“ 1 Τοιαῦτα καὶ τὰ κατὰ Ἰάκωβον, οὗ ἡ πρώτη τῶν ὀνομαζομένων καθολικῶν ἐπιστολῶν εἶναι λέγεται·
 ἰατέον δὲ ὡς νοθεύεται μέν, οὐ πολλοὶ γοῦν τῶν παλαιῶν αὐτῆς ἐμνημόνευααν, ὡς οὐδὲ τῆς λεγομένης Ἰούδα, μιᾶς καὶ αὐτῆς αὐτῆς τῶν ἑπτὰ λεγομένων καθολικῶν·
 ὅμως δ’ ἴσμεν καὶ ταύτας μετὰ τῶν λοιπῶν ἐν πλείσταις δεδημοσιευμένας ἐκκλησίαις.
 XXIV.
 Νέρωνος δὲ ὄγδοον ἄγοντος τῆς βασιλείας ἔτος, πρῶτος μετὰ Μάρκον τὸν εὐαγγελιστὴν τῆς ἐν Ἀλεξανδρείᾳ παροικίας Ἀνιανὸς τὴν λειτουργίαν διαδέχεται.
 XXV.
 Κραταιουμένης δ’ ἤδη τῷ Νέρωνι τῆς ἀρχῆς, εἰς ἀνοσίους ὀκείλας ἐπιτηδεύσεις, κατ’ αὐ- τῆς ὡπλίζετο τῆς εἰς τὸν τῶν ὅλων θεὸν εὐσεβείας.
 γράφειν μὲν οὖν οἷός τις οὗτος γεγένηται τὴν μοχθηρίαν, οὐ τῆς παρούσης γένοιτ’ ἂν σχολῆς·
 πολλῶν γε μὴν τὰ κατ’ αὐτὸν ἀκριβεστάταις παραδεδωκότων διηγήσεαιν, πάρεστιν ὅτῳ φί- angered at thisand sent secretlyto the Emperor, begging him to write to Αnanus to give up doing such things, for they said that he had not aeted rightly from the very beginning.
 Αnd some of them also went to meet Albinus as he journeyed from Alexandria, and explriaIned that it wasillegal for Αnanus to assemblethe council without his permission.
 Albinus was influenced by what was said and wrote angrily to Αnanus threateninghimwith penalties, and for this reason King Agrippa deprived him of the Ηigh Ρriesthood when he had held it for three months, and appointed Jesus the son of Dammaeus.
" Such is the story of James, whose is said to be the first of the Εpistles ealled Catholic.
 It is to he observed that its authenticity is denied, since few of the ancients quote it, as is alsothe case with the Epistle ealled’s, which is itseK oneofthe seven called Catholie;
 nevertheless we know that these letters have been used publicly with the rest in most churehes.
 XXIV.
 In the eighth year of the reign οf Νero Αnnianus was the nrst after Mark the Evangelist to receive charge of the ffiocese2 of Alexandria.
 XXV.
 When the rule of Νero was now gathering strenght for unholy objects he began to take up arms against the worship of the Good οf the universe.
 Ιt is not part of the present work to describe his depravity:
 many indeed have related his story in accurate nauative, and from them he who wishes can study λον, ἐξ αὐτῶν τὴν σκαιότητα τῆς τἀνδρὸς ἐκτόπου καταθεωμααι μανίας, καθ’ ἢν οὐ μετὰ λογισμοῦ μυρίων ὅαων ἀπωλείας διεξελθών, ἐπὶ τοααύτην ἤλασε μιαιφονίαν, ὡς μηδὲ τῶν οἰκειοτάτων τε καὶ φιλτάτων ἐπισχεῖν, μητέρα δὲ ὁμοίως καὶ ἀδελφοὺς καὶ γυναῖκα αὺν καὶ ἄλλοις μυρίοις τῷ γένει προσήκουσιν τρόπον ἐχθρῶν καὶ πολε- μίων ποικίλαις θανάτων ἰδέαις διαχρήαααθαι.
 ἐνέδει δ’ ἄρα τοῖς πᾶσι καὶ τοῦτ' ἐπιγραφῆναι αὐτῷ, ὡς ἀν’ πρῶτος αὐτοκρατόρων τῆς εἰς τὸ θεῖον εὐαεβείας πολέμιος ἀναδειχθείη.
 τούτου πάλιν ὁ Ῥωμαῖος Τερτυλλιανὸς ὧδέ πως λέγων μνημονεύει ἐντύχετε τοῖς ὑπομνήμααιν ὑμῶν, ἐκεῖ εὑρήαετε πρῶτον Νέρωνα τοῦτο τὸ δόγμα, ἡνίκα μάλιατα ἐν Ῥώμῃ, τὴν ἀνατολὴν πᾶσαν ὑποτάξας, ὠμὸς ἦν εἰς πάντας, διώξαντα.
 τοιού- τῳ τῆς κολάαεως ἡμῶν ἀρχηγῷ καυχώμεθα.
 ὁ γὰρ εἰδὼς ἐκεῖνον νοῆσαι δύναται ὡς οὐκ ἄν, εἰ μὴ μέγα τι ἀγαθὸν ἦν, ὑπὸ Νέρωνος κατακριθῆναι.
” ταύτῃ γοῦν οὗτος, θεομάχος ἐν τοῖς μάλιστα πρῶτος ἀνακηρυχθείς, ἐπὶ τὰς κατὰ τῶν ἀποστόλων ἐπήρθη σφαγάς.
 Παῦλος δὴ οὖν ἐπ’ αὐτῆς‘ Ρώμης τὴν κεφαλὴν ἀποτμηθῆναι καὶ Πέτρος ὡσαύτως ἀναακολοπιαθῆναι κατ’ αὐτὸν ἱστοροῦνται, καὶ πιστοῦταί γε τὴν ἱστορίαν ἡ Πέτρου καὶ Παύλου εἰς δεῦρο κρατήσασα ἐπὶ τῶν αὐτόθι κοιμητηρίων πρόαρηαις, οὐδὲν δὲ ἦττον καὶ ἐκκλησιαστικὸς ἀνήρ, Γάϊος ὄνομα, κατὰ Ζεφυρῖνον‘ Ρωμαίων γεγονὼς ἐπίσκοπον·
 ὃς δὴ Πρόκλῳ τῆς κατὰ Φρύγας προἰ·
 αταμένῳ the perversity ofhisdegenerate madness, which made him compass the unreasonable destruction of so many thousands, until he reached that Bnal guilt οf sparing neitherhisnearest nor dearest, so that in various ways he did to death alike his mother, brothers, and wife, with thousands of others attachedtohis family,as though they were enemies and foes.
 nut with all this there was still lacking to him thiμ’ that it shouldbe attributed to him thathewas the nrst οf theemperorsto be pointedout asa foe of divine religion.
 This again the Latin writer Tertullian mentions in one place as follows:
“ Look at your records:
 there you will Rnd that Νero was the nrst to persecutethis belief when, haring overcomethe whole Εast, he was speeially cruel in Rome against all.
 1 We boast that sueh a man was the author of our chastisement;
 for he who knows him can understand that nothing would have been condemned by Kero had it not been great and good.
" In thiswaythen was hetheRrst to be heraldedas above allafighter against God, and raised up to slaughter against the Apostles.
 It is related that in his time Ρaul was beheaded in Rome itselr, and that Ρeter likewisewas crucified,and the title οf“Ρeter and Ρaul,’’ which is still given tothecemeteries there, confirms the story, no lessthan doesa writer οf the Church named caius, who lived when Zefyrinus was bishop οf Rome.
 Caius in a written discussion γνώμης ἐγγράφως διαλεχθείς, αὐτὰ δὴ ταῦτα περὶ τῶν τόπων, ἔνθα τῶν εἰρημένων ἀποστόλων τὰ ἱερὰ ακηνώματα κατατέθειται, φηαίν·
“ ἐγὼ’ ς δὲ τὰ τρόπαια τῶν ἀποστόλων ἔχω δεῖξαι.
 ἐὰν γὰρ θελήσῃς ἀπελθεῖν ἐπὶ τὸν Βασικανὸν ἢ ἐπὶ τὴν ὁδὸν τὴν Ὠστίαν, εὑρήσεις τὰ τρόπαια τῶν ταύτην ἱδρυσαμένων τὴν ἐκκληλσίαν.
 ” Ὡς δὲ κατὰ τὸν αὐτὸν ἄμφω καιρὸν ἐμαρτύρησαν, Κορινθίων ἐπίσκοπος Διονύσιος ἐγγράφως Ῥωμαίοις ὁμιλῶν, ὧδε παρίατηαιν“ ταῦτα καὶ ὑμεῖς διὰ τῆς τοσαύτης νουθεαίας τὴν ἀπὸ Πέτρου καὶ Παύλου φυτείαν γενηθεῖσαν Ῥωμαίων τε καὶ Κορινθίων αυνεκεράαατε.
 καὶ γὰρ ἄμφω καὶ εἰς τὴν ἡμετέραν Κόρινθον φυτεύααντες ἡμᾶς ὁμοίως ἐδίδαξαν, ὁμοίως δὲ καὶ εἰς τὴν Ἰταλίαν ὁμόσε διδάξαντες ἐμαρτύρησαν κατὰ τὸν αὐτὸν καιρόν.’
 ’ 1 καὶ ταῦτα δέ, ὡς ἂν ἔτι μᾶλλον πιστωθείη τὰ τῆς ἰατορίας.
 XXVI.
 Αὖθις δ’ ὁ Ἰώαηπος πλεῖστα δάα περὶ τῆς τὸ πᾶν Ἰουδαίων ἔθνος καταλαβούσης διελθὼν αυμφορᾶς, δηλοῖ κατὰ λέξιν ἐπὶ πλείστοις ἄλλοις μυρίους ὅσους τῶν παρὰ Ἰουδαίοις τετιμημένων μάατιξιν αἰκισθέντας ἐν αὐτῇ τῇ τετιμημένων ἀνααταυρωθῆναι ὑπὸ Φλώρου·
 τοῦτον δὲ εἶναι τῆς Ἰουδαίας ἐπίτροπον, ὁπηνίκα τὴν ἄρχην ἀναρριπισθῆναι τοῦ πολέμου, ἔτους δωδεκάτου τῆς Νέρωνος ἡγεμονίας, αυνέβη.
 εἶτα δὲ καὶ καθ’ ὅλην τὴν Συρίαν ἔπι τῆ τῶν Ἰουδαίων ἀποστάσει φησι κατειληφέναι ταραχήν, πανταχόσε τῶν ἀπὸ τοῦ ἔθνους πρὸς τῶν κατὰ πόλιν with Ρroclus, the leader οf the Montanists, 1 speaks as follows οf the places where the sacred rellics of the Αpοstles in question are depoSited :
“ ButI can point οut thetrophiesof the Αpostles, for if you will goto the Vaticanor to the OstianWayyou will findthe trophies οf those who founded thiS’’ Αnd that theyboth were martyred at the same time Dionysius, bishop οf Corinth, affirms in this passage of his correspondenee wtih the Romans :
“ By so greatan admonition you bound together the foundations of the Romans and Corinthians by Ρeter and Ρaul, for both of them taught together in our corinth and were our founders, and together also taught in Italy in the Same place and were mart yred at the same’’ Αnd thismayserve to conRrm still further the facts narrated.
 XXVI.
 Josephus in the courSe of hiS extremely detailed description of the cataStrophe which overcame the whole Jewish raee, in additionto many other things explains exactly how many thousand Jews οf high rank in Jerusalem itself were outraged, Seourged, and crucified by FloruS, and that he was procurator of Judaea when it happened that the beginning of the war blamd up in the twelfth year of the reign of Νero.
 Ηe next says that throughout syria terrible disturbances followed the revolt οf the Jews.
 Εverywhere the Gentiles mercilessly attaeked ἐνοίκων ὡς ἂν πολεμίων ἀνηλεῶς πορθουμένων, ὤσατε ὁρᾶν τὰς πόλεις μεατὰς ἀτάφων σωμάτων καὶ νεκροὺς ἅμα νηπίοις γέροντας ἐρριμμένους γύναιά τε μηδὲ τῆς ἐπ’ αἰδῶ σκέπης καὶ πᾶααν μὲν τὴν ἐπαρχίαν μεοτὴν ἀδιηγήτων συμφορῶν, μείζονα δὲ τῶν ἑκάστοτε τὴν ἐπὶ τοῖς ἀπειλουμένοις ἀνάτααιν.
 ταῦτα κατὰ λέξιν ὁ Ἰώσηπος.
 καὶ τὰ μὲν κατὰ Ἰουδαίους ἐν τούτοις ἦν.
 the Jews in the ciues as though theywere foes, so that the cities could be seen full οf unburied bodies, thrown out dead, old men and children, and women without covering for their nakedness;
 the whole province was full of indescribable misery and the strain of the threats for the future was worse than the crimes of the Ρresent.
 This Josephus narrates, and such was the cond1tion οf the Jews.
 Γ Τάδε καὶ ἡp περιέχει βίβλος τῆς Ἐκκλησιαστικῆς ἰατορίας Αݲ ὅποι γῆς ἐκήρυξαν τὸν Χριστὸν οἱ ἀπόστολοι.
 Bݲ Τίς πρῶτος τῆς ῾Ρωμαίων ἐκκληαίας προέατη.
 Γݲ Περὶ τῶν ἐπιστολῶν τῶν ἀποατόλων.
 Δݲ Περὶ τῆς πρώτης τῶν ἀποατόλων διαδοχῆς.
 Εݲ Περὶ τῆς μετὰ τὸν Χριατὸν ὑστάτης Ἰουδαίων πολιορκίας.
 ςݲ Περὶ τοῦ πιέσαντος αὐτοὺς λιμοῦ.
 Ζݲ Περὶ τῶν τοῦ Χριστοῦ προρρήσεων.
 Ηݲ Περὶ τῶν πρὸ τοῦ πολέμου αημείων.
 Θݲ Περὶ Ἰωαήπου καὶ ὧν κατέλιπεν αυγγραμ- Ιݲ Ὅπως τῶν θείων μνημονεύει βιβλίων.
 ΙݲΑݲ Ὡς μετὰ Ἰάκωβον ἡγεῖται Συμεὼν τῆς ἐν Ἱεροσολύμοις ἐκκλησίας.
 ΙݲBݲ Ὡς Οὐεαπααιανὸς τοὺς ἐκ Δαυὶδ ἀναξητεῖσθαι προστάττει.
 LݲΓݲ Ὡς δεύτερος Ἀλεξανδρέων ἡγεῖται Ἀβίλιος.
 ΙݲΔݲ Ὡς καὶ ῾Ρωμαίων δεύτερος Ἀνέγκλητος ἐπιακοπεῖ.
 ΙݲΕݲ Ὡς τρίτος μετ’ αὐτὸν Κλήμης.
 Ιݲςݲ Περὶ τῆς Κλήμεντος ἐπιατολῆς.
 ΙݲΖݲ Περὶ τοῦ κατὰ Δομετιανὸν διωγμοῦ.
 CONTENTS OF BOOK III The contents ofthe third book of the History of the Church is as follows:
 I.
 The parts of the world in which the apostles preached Christ.
 II.
 Who was the first ruler of the church οf the Romans.
 III.
 on the letters of the Ρostles.
 IV, on the first successors ofthe aportles.
 V.
 on the lastsiege of the Jews after Christ.
 VI.
 On the famine that οppressed them.
 VII.
 On the Ρrοphecies οf Crhist.
 VIII.
 On the signs before the war.
 IX.
 On Josephus andthe writings which he left.
 X.
 Ηow he quotes the sacred books.
 XI.
 Ηow after James Simeon ruled the church at Jerusalem.
 XII.
 Ηοw vespasian ordered the family of Darivld to be sought out.
 XIII.
 Ηow Abilius was the seeond ruler of the Alexandrians.
 XIV.
 Ηow Anencletus was the second bishop ofthe Romans.
 XV.
 How, after him, clement was the third.
 XVI.
 On the epistle of Clement.
 XVII.
p On the Ρersecution under Domitian.
 ΙΗݲ Περὶ Ἰωάννου τοῦ ἀποατόλου καὶ τῆς Ἀποκαλύψεως.
 ΙΘݲ Ὡς Δομετιανὸς τοὺς ἀπὸ γένους Δαυὶδ ἀναιρεῖαθαι προατάττει.
 Κݲ Περὶ τῶν πρὸς γένους τοῦ αωτῆρος ἡμῶν.
 ΚΑݲ Ὡς τῆς Ἀλεξανδρέων ἐκκληαίας τρίτος ἡγεῖ.
 — τᾶι Κερδῶν.
 ΚΒݲ Ὡς τῆς Ἀντιοχέων δεύτερος Ἰγνάτιος.
 ΕΓݲ‘ Iατορία περὶ Ἰωάννου τοῦ ἀποστόλου.
 ΚΔݲ Περὶ τῆς τάξεως τῶν εὐαγγελίων.
 ΚΕݲ Περὶ τῶν ὁμολογουμένων θείων γραφῶν καὶ— τῶν μὴ τοιούτων.
 Κςݲ Περὶ Μενάνδρου τοῦ γόητος.
 ΚΖݲ Ηερὶ τῆς τῶν’ Eβιωναίων αἱρέσεως.
 ΚΗݲ Ηερὶ Κηρίνθου αἱρεαιάρχου.
 ΚΘݲ Περὶ Νικολάου καὶ τῶν ἐξ αὐτοῦ κεκλημένων.
 Λݲ Περὶ τῶν ἐν αυξυγίαις ἐξετααθέντων ἀποστόλων.
 ΛΑݲ Περὶ τῆς Ἰωάννου καὶ Φιλίππου τελευτῆς.
 ΛBݲ Ὅπως Συμεὼν ὁ ἐν Ἱεροσολύμοις ἐπίσκοπος ἐμαρτύρησεν.
 ΛΓݲ Ὅπως Τραϊανὸς ζητεῖσθαι Χριστιανοῦς ἐκώλυσεν.
 ΛΔݲ Ὡς τῆς Ῥωμαίων ἐκκληαίας τέταρτος Εὐάρεστος ἡγεῖται.
 ΛΕݲ Ὡς τρίτος τῆς ἐν Ἱεροαολύμοις Ἰοῦστος.
 Λςݲ 5 Περὶ Ἰγνατίου καὶ τῶν ἐπιατολῶν αὐτοῦ.
 ΛΖݲ Περὶ τῶν εἰς ἔτι τότε διαπρεπόντων εὐαγγελιστῶν.
 ΛΗݲ Περὶ τῆς Κλήμεντος ἐπιατολῆς καὶ τῶν φευδῶς εἰς αὐτὸν ἀναφερομένων.
 ἴ’ ΛΘݲ Περὶ τῶν Παπία συγγραμμάτων.
 XVIII.
 On John the Apostle and the Apocalypse.
 XIX.
 How domitian commanded the family of David to be destroyed.
 XX.
 On family family of our Saviour.
 XXI.
 How Cerdo was the third to rule the church of the Alexandrians.
 XXII.
 How Ignatius was the second of the Antiochians.
 XXIII.
 Α narrative about John the Apostle.
 XXIV.
 Οn the orderof the Gospels.
 XXV.
 Οn the writings acknowledged as sacred and Οn those which are not.
 XXVI.
 Οn Μenander the Sorcerer.
 XXVII.
 Οn the heresy of the Ebionites.
 XXVII.
 On Cerinthus the Heresiarch.
 XXIX.
 On Nicholas and those called after him.
 XXX.
 Οn the apostleswho were tested by marriage.
 XXXO/ On the death of Johnand Philip.
 XXXII.
 How Simeon, the bishopin Jerusalem, was martyred.
 XXXIII.
 How Trajan forbade the Christians to be sought out.
 XXXIV.
 How Evarestus was the fourth to rule the church of the Romans.
 XXXV.
 How Justus was the third ruler of the church in jerusalem.
 XXXVI.
 Οn Ignatius and his letters.
 XXXVII.
 On the evangelistswho were still flourishing.
 XXXVIII.
 On the letter of Clement and the writings fabely attributed to him.
 XXXIX.
 On the writingsof Papias.
 III Ι.
 Τὰ μὲν δὴ κατὰ Ἰουδαίους ἐν τούτοις ἢν·
 τῶν δὲ ἱερῶν τοῦ σωτῆρος ἡμῶν ἀποστόλων τε καὶ μαθητῶν ἐφ’ ἅπασαν κατασπαρέντων τὴν οἰκουμένην, Θωμᾶς μέν, ὡς ἡ παράδοσις περιέχει, τὴν Παρθίαν εἴληχεν, Ἀνδρέας δὲ τὴν Σκυθίαν, Ἰωάννης τὴν Ἀσίαν, πρὸς οὓς καὶ διατρίψας ἐν Ἐφέσῳ τελευτᾷ, Πέτροςδ’ ἐν Πόντῳ καὶ Γαλατίᾳ καὶ Βιθυνίᾳ Καππαδοκίᾳ τε καὶ Ἀσίᾳ κεκηρυχέναι τοῖς ἐκ διασπορᾶς Ἰουδαίοις ἔοικεν·
 ὃς καὶ ἐπὶ τέλει ἐν Ῥώμῃ γενόμενος, ἀνεσκολοπίσθη κατὰ κεφαλῆς, οὕτως αὐτὸς ἀξιώσας παθεῖν.
 τί δεῖ περὶ Παύλου λέγειν, ἀπὸ Ἱερπουσαλὴμ μέχρι τοῦ Ἰλλυρικοῦ πεπληρωκότος τὸ εὐαγγέλιον τοῦ Χριστοῦ καὶ ὕστερον ἐν τῆ Ῥώμῃ ἐπὶ Νέρωνος μεμαρτυρηκότος;
 ταῦτα Ὠριγένει κατὰ λέξιν ἐν τρίτῳ τόμῳ τῶν εἰς τὴν Γένεσιν ἐξηγητικῶν εἴρηται.
 ΙΙ.
 Τῆς δὲ Ῥωμαίων ἐκκλησίας μετὰ τὴν Παύλου καὶ Πέτρου μαρτυρίαν πρῶτος κληροῦται τὴν ἐπισκοπὴν Λίνος.
 μνημονεύει τούτου Τιμοθέῳ γράφων ἀπὸ Ῥώμης ὁ Παῦλος κατὰ τὴν ἐπὶ τέλει τῆς ἐπιστολῆς πρόσρησιν.
 ΙΙΙ.
 Πέτρου μὲν οὗν ἐπιστολὴ μία, ἡ λεγομένη αὐτοῦ προτέρα, ἀνωμολόγηται, ταύτῃ δὲ καὶ οἱ BOOK IIII.
 Such was the condition of things among the Jews, but the holy Apostles and disciples of our Saviour were seattered throughout the whole world.
 Thomas, as tradition relates, obtained bylot Parthia, Andrew Scythia, John Asia( and he stayedthereand diedin Ephesus), but Ρeter Seems to have preached to the Jews of the Dispersion in Pontus and Galatia and Bithynia, Cappadocia, and Asia, and at the end he came to Rome and was crueffied head downwards, for sohe had demandedto suffer.
 What need besaidof Ρaul, who fulffiled the gospel of Christ from Jerusalem to Illyria and afterward was martyred in Rome under Νerο? This is stated exactlyby Οrigen in the third volume of his commentary on Genesis.
 II.
 Αfter the martyrdom of Paul and Ρeter, Linus was the first appointed to the bishopric of the churchof Rome.
 Ρaul mentions him when writing from Rome to Timothy in the salutation at the end of the Εpistle.
 III.
 Οf Ρeter, one epistle, that which iscalledhis first, is admitted, and the aneient presbyters used πάλαι πρεσβύτεροι ὡς ἀναμφιλέκτῳ ἐν τοῖς σφῶν αὐτῶν κατακέχρηνται συγγράμμασιν·
 τὴν δὲ φερομένην δευτέραν οὐκ ἐνδιάθηκον μὲν εἶναι παρειλήφαμεν, ὅμως δὲ πολλοῖς χρήσιμος φανεῖσα, μετὰ τῶν ἄλλων ἐσπουδάσθη γραφῶν.
 τό γε μὴν τῶν ἐπικεκλημένων αὐτοῦ Πραξέων καὶ τὸ κατ’ αὐτὸν ὠνομασμένον εὐαγγέλιον τό τε λεγόμενον αὐτοῦ Κήρυγμα καὶ τὴν καλουμένην Ἀποκάλυψιν οὐδ’ ὅλως ἐν καθολικοῖς ἴσμεν παραδεδομένα, ὅτι μήτε ἀρχαίων μήτε μὴν καθ’ ἡμᾶς τις ἐκκλησιαστικὸς συγγραφεὺς ταῖς ἐξ αὐτῶν συνεχρήσατο μαρτυρίαις.
 προϊούσης δὲ τῆς ἰατορίας προύργου ποιήσομαι σὺν ταῖς διαδοχαῖς ὑποσημήνασθαι τίνες τῶν κατὰ χρόνους ἐκκλησιαστικῶν συγγραφέων ὁποίαις κέχρηνται τῶν ἀντιλεγομένων, τίνα τε περὶ τῶν ἐνδιαθήκων καὶ ὁμολογουμένων γραφῶν καὶ ὅσα περὶ τῶν μὴ τοιούτων αὐτοῖς εἴρηται.
 ἀλλὰ τὰ μὲν ὀνομαζόμενα Πέτρου, ὧν μόνην μίαν γνησίαν ἔγνων ἐπιστολὴν καὶ παρὰ τοῖς πάλαι πρεσβυτέροις ὁμολογουμένην, τοσαῦτα·
 τοῦ δὲ Παύλου πρόδηλοι καὶ σαφεῖς αἱ δεκατέσσαρες·
 ὅτι γε μήν τινες ἠθετήκασι τὴν πρὸς Ἑβραίους, πρὸς τῆς Ῥωμαίων ἐκκλησίας ὡς μὴ Παύλου οὖσαν αὐτὴν ἀντιλέγεσθαι φήσαντες, οὐ δίκαιον ἀγνοεῖν·
 καὶ τὰ περὶ ταύτης δὲ τοῖς πρὸ ἡμῶν εἰρημένα κατὰ καιρὸν παραθήσομαι.
 οὐδὲ μὴν τὰς λεγομένας αὐτοῦ Πραξεῖς ἐν ἀναμφιλέκτοις παρείληφα.
 ἐπεὶ δ’ ὁ αὐτὸς ἀπόστολος ἐν ταῖς ἐπὶ τέλει προσρήσεσιν τῆς πρὸς Ῥωμαίους μνήμην πεποίηται μετὰ τῶν ἄλλων καὶ Ἑρμᾶ, οὗ φασιν ὑπάρχειν τὸ τοῦ Ποιμένος βιβλίον, ἰστέον ὡς καὶ τοῦτο πρὸς μέν τινων ἀντιλέλεκται, δι’ οὓς οὐκ ἄν ἐν ὁμολογου- this in their οwn writings as unquestioned, but the so- called second Epistle we have not received as canonical, but neverthelessit has appeared useful to many, and has been studied with other seriptures.
 On the otherhand, of the Αctsbearinghis name, and the Gospel named according to him and Preaching called his and the so- called Revelation, we haveno knowledge at allinCatholic tradition, for no orthodox1 writer of the andent time or of our own has used their testimonies.
 Αs the narrative proceeds 1 will take pains to infficate suecessively wMhlch of the orthodox writers in eaeh period used any of the doubtful books, and what they said about the canonical and accepted scriptures and what about those which are not such.
 Νow the above are the books bearing the nameof Ρeter, of whichIrecognize only οne as genuine and admitted by the presbytersof old.
 Αnd the fourteen letters of Ρaul are obvious and plain, yet itis not righttoignore that some disputethe Epistle tothe Hebrews, saying that it was rejected by the church of Rome as not beingby Ρaul, andI will expound at the proper time what was sriald about it by our predecessors.
 Νor haveI received his so- called Acts among undisputed books.
 But since the same Apostle in the salutations at the end οf Romans has mentioned among others Hermas, whose, they say, is the Bookof the shepherd, it should be known that this alsois rejected by some, and for their sake should not be placed among μένοις τεθείη, ὑφ’ ἑτέρων δὲ ἀναγκαιότατον οἷς μάλιστα δεῖ στοιχειώσεως εἰσαγωγικῆς, κέκριται·
 ὅθεν ἤδη καὶ ἐν ἐκκλησίαις ἴσμεν αὐτὸ δεδημοσιευμένον, καὶ τῶν παλαιτάτων δὲ συγγραφέων κεχρημένους τινὰς αὐτῷ κατείληφα.
 ταῦτα εἰς παράστασιν τῶν τε ἀναντιρρήτων καὶ τῶν μὴ παρὰ πᾶσιν ὁμολογουμένων θείων γραμμάτων εἰρήσθω.
 IV.
 Ὅτι μὲν οὖν τοῖς ἐξ ἐθνῶν κηρύσσων ὁ Παῦλος τοὺς ἀπὸ Ἱερουσαλὴμ καὶ κύκλῳ μέχρι τοῦ Ἰλλυρικοῦ τῶν ἐκκλησιῶν καταβέβλητο θεμελίους, δῆλον ἐκ τῶν αὐτοῦ γένοιτ’ ἄν φωνῶν καὶ ἀφ’ ὧν ὁ Λουκᾶς ἐν ταῖς Πράξεσιν ἱστόρησεν·
 καὶ ἐκ τῶν Πέτρου δὲ λέξεων ἐν ὁπόσαις καὶ οὗτος ἐπαρχίαις τοὺς ἐκ περιτομῆς τὸν Χριστὸν εὐαγγελιζόμενος τὸν τῆς καινῆς διαθήκης παρεδίδου λόγον, σαφὲς ἂν εἴη ἀφ’ ἦς εἰρήκαμεν ὁμολογουμένης αὐτοῦ ἐπιστολῆς, ἐν ἢ τοῖς ἐξ Ἑβραίων οὖσιν ἐν διασπορᾷ Πόντου καὶ Γαλατίας Καππαδοκίας τε καὶ Ἀσίας καὶ Βιθυνίας γράφει.
 δάοι δὲ τούτων καὶ τίνες γνήσιοι ζηλωταὶ γεγονότες τὰς πρὸς αὐτῶν ἱδρυθείσας ἱκανοὶ ποιμαίνειν ἐδοκιμάσθησαν ἐκκλησίας, οὐ ῥᾴδιον εἰπεῖν, μὴ ὅτι γε δάους ἄν τις ἐκ τῶν Παύλου φωνῶν ἀναλέξοιτο·
 τούτου γὰρ οὖν μυρίοι συνεργοὶ καί, ὡς αὐτὸς ὠνόμασεν, συστρατιῶται γεγόνασιν, ὧν οἱ πλείους ἀλήστου πρὸς αὐτοῦ μνήμης ἠξίωνται, διηνεκῆ τὴν περὶ αὐτῶν μαρτυρίαν ταῖς ἰδίαις ἐπιστολαῖς ἐγκαταλέξαντος, οὐ μὴν ἀλλὰ καὶ ὁ Λουκᾶς ἐν ταῖς Πράξεσιν τοὺς γνωρίμους αὐτοῦ καταλέγων ἐξ ὀνόματος αὐτῶν μνημονεύει.
 Τιμό γε μὴν τῆς ἐν Ἐφέσω παροικίας ἱστορεῖται πρῶτος τὴν ἐπισκοπῆν εἰληχέναι, ὡς καὶ Τίτος aceepted books, but by others it has been judged most valuable, especially to thoSe Who need elementary instruction.
 For this reason we know that it has been used in publicin churehes, and I have found it quoted by someof the most ancient writers.
 Let this suffiee for the establishment of the divine wrintings whichare undisputed,and of those which are not received bv all.
 IV.
 Νοw it would be clear from Paul 's own words and from the narrative of Luke in the Acts that Ρaul, in his preaching to the Gentiles, laid the foundations of the churches from Jerusalem round about unto Illyricum.
 Αnd from the Epistle which we have spoken ofas indisputably Peter's, in whichhe writes to those of the Hebrewsinthe Dispersion of Pontus and Galatia, Cappadocia, Asia, and Bithynia, it would be clear from his own words in how many provinces he delivered the word οf the Νew Testament by preaching the Gospel of Christ to those of the eireumcision.
 But it is not easy to say how many οf these and which of them were genuinely zealous and proved their ability to be the pastors of the churches founded by the Apostles, except by makinga list of those mentioned by raul.
 For there were many thousands of his fellow- workers and, as hecalled them himself, fellow- soldiers,of whom the most were grantedby him memorialpast forgetting, for he recounts his testimony to them unceasingly in his own letters, and, moreover, Luke also in the Acts givesa list of those known to him and mentions them by name.
 Thus Timothy is related to have been the first appointed bishopof the dioceseof Ephesus, as τῶν ἐπὶ Κρήτης ἐκκλησιῶν.
 Λουδᾶς δὲ τὸ μὲν γένος ὢν τῶν ἀπ’ Ἀντιοχείας, τὴν ἐπιστήμην δὲ ἰατρός, τὰ πλεῖστα συγγεγονὼς τῷ Παύλῳ, καὶ τοῖς λοιποῖς δὲ οὐ παρέργως τῶν ἀποστόλων ὡμιληκώς, ἧς ἀπὸ τούτων προσεκτήσατο ψυχῶν θεραπευτικῆς ἐν δυσὶν ἡμῖν ὑποδείγματα θεοπνεύστοις κατέλιπεν βιβλίοις, τῷ τε εὐαγγελίῳ, δ’ καὶ χαράξαι μαρτύρεται καθ’ ἃ παρέδοσαν αὐτῷ οἱ ἀπ’ ἀρχῆς αὐτόπται καὶ ὑπηρέται γενόμενοι τοῦ λόγου, οἷς καί φησιν ἔτ’ ἄνωθεν ἅπασι παρηκολουθηκέναι, καὶ ταῖς τῶν ἀποστόλων Πράξεσιν, ἃς οὐκέτι δι’ ἀκοῆς, ὀφθαλμοῖς δὲ παραλαβὼν ουνετάξατο.
 φασὶν δ’ ὡς ἄρα τοῦ κατ’ αὐτὸν εὐαγγελίου μνημονεύειν ὁ Παῦλος εἴωθεν, ὁπηνίκα ὡς περὶ ἰδίου τινὸς εὐαγγελίου γράφων ἔλεγεν“ κατὰ τὸ εὐαγγέλιόν μου.
 ” τῶν δὲ λοιπῶν ἀκολούθων τοῦ Παύλου Κρήσκης μὲν ἔπι τὰς Γαλλίας στειλάμενος ὐπ᾿ αὐτοῦ μαρτυρεῖται, Λίνος δὲ, οὗ συνόντος ἐπὶ Ῥώμης αὐτῷ κατὰ τὴν δευτέραν πρὸς Τιμόθεον ἐπιστολήν, πρῶτος μετὰ Πέτρον τῆς Ῥωμαίων ἐκκλησίας τὴν ἐπισκοπὴν ἤδη πρότερον τερον κληρωθεὶς δεδήλωται·
 ἀλλὰ καὶ ὁ Κλήμης, τῆς Ῥωμαίων καὶ αὐτὸς ἐκκλησίας τρίτος ἐπίσκοπος καταστάς, Παύλου συνεργὸς καὶ συναθλητὴς γεγονέναι πρὸς αὐτοῦ μαρτυρεῖται.
 ἐπὶ τούτοις καὶ τὸν Ἀρεοπαγίτην ἐκεῖνον, Διονύσιος ὄνομα αὐτῷ, ὃν ἐν ταῖς Πράξεσι μετὰ τὴν ἐν Ἀρείῳ πάγῳ πρὸς Ἀθηναίους Παύλου δημηγορίαν πρῶτον πιστεῦσαι ἀνέγραφεν ὁ Λουκᾶς, τῆς ἐν Ἀθήναις ἐκκλησίας πρῶτον ἐπίσκοπον ἀρχαίων τις ἕτερος Διονύσιος, τῆς Κορινθίων παροικίας ποιμήν, ποιμήν, ἱστορεῖ.
 ἀλλὰ γὰρ ὁδῷ was Titus of the ehurehes in Crete.
 Luke, who was by raee an Antiochian and a physicianby profession, was longa companion of Ρaul, and had careful conversation with the other Apostles, and in two books left us examples of the medicine for souls which he had gained from them— the Gospel, which he testifies that he had planned according to the tradition reeeived by him by those who were from the beginning eyewitnesses and ministers of the word, all of whom he says,1 moreover,he had followed from the beginning, and the Acts of the Apostleswhichhe composed no longeronthe evidenceofhearing but of hisown eyes.
 Αnd they say that Paul was actually accustomed to quote from Luke 's Gospel since when writing of some Gospel as his own he used to say,“ According to my” Of the otherfollowersof Ρaul thereisevidence that Crescens was sent byhimto Gaul, and Linus, who is mentioned in the seeond Epistle to Timothy as present with him in Rome has already been deelared to have been the first after Ρeter to be appointed to the bishopric of the Chureh in Rome.
 Of Clement too, who was himself made the third bishop of the chureh of Rome, it is testified byPaul that he worked and strove in company with him.
 In addition to these Dionysius, one ofthe ancients, the pastor Of the diocese of the Corinthians, relates that the first bishop of the Chureh at Athens was that member ofthe Areopagus,the Οther Dionysius, whose originaleonversion after Ρaul’s speech to the Athenians in the Areopagus Luke deseribed in the Acts.
 Now προβαίνουσιν, ἐπὶ καιροῦ τὰ τῆς κατὰ χρόνους τῶν ἀποστόλων διαδοχῆς ἡμῖν εἰρήσεται·
 νῦνδ’ ἐπὶ τὰ ἑξῆς ἴωμεν τῆς ἰατορίας.
 V.
 Μετὰ Νέρωνα δέκα πρὸς τρισὶν ἔτεσιν τὴν ἀρχὴν ἐπικρατήσαντα τῶν ἀμφὶ Γάλβαν καὶ Ὄθωνα ἐνιαυτὸν ἐπὶ μησὶν ἓξ διαγενομένων, Οὐεσπασιανός, ταῖς κατὰ Ἰουδαίων παρατάξεσιν λαμπρυνόμενος, βασιλεὺς ἐπ’ αὐτῆς ἀναδείκνυται τῆς Ἰουδαίας, αὐτοκράτωρ πρὸς τῶν αὐτόθι στρατοπέδων ἀναγορευθείς.
 τὴν ἐπὶ Ῥώμης οὖν αὐτίκα στειλάμενος, Τίτῳ τῷ παιδὶ τὸν κατὰ Ἰουδαίων ἐγχειρίζει πόλεμον.
 μετά γε μὴν τὴν τοῦ σωτῆρος ἡμῶν ἀνάληψιν Ἰουδαίων πρὸς τῷ κατ’ αὐτοῦ τολμήματι ἤδη καὶ κατὰ τῶν ἀποστόλων αὐτοῦ πλείστας ὅσας ἐπιβουλὰς με μηχανὴ μένων, πρώτου τε Στεφάνου λίθοις ὑπ’ αὐτῶν ἀνῃρημένου, εἶτα δὲ μετ’ αὐτὸν Ἰακώβου, ὃς ἢν Ζεβεδαίου μὲν παῖς, ἀδελφὸς δὲ Ἰωάννου, τὴν κεφαλὴν ἀποτμηθέντος, ἐπὶ πᾶσί τε Ἰακώβου, τοῦ τὸν αὐτόθι τῆς ἐπισκοπῆς θρόνον πρώτου μετὰ τὴν του σμτῆτρος ἡμῶν ἀνάληψιν κεκληρωμένου, τὸν προδηλωθέντα τρόπον μεταλλάξαντος, τῶν τε λοιπῶν ἀποστόλων μυρία εἰς θάνατον ἐπιβεβουλευμένων καὶ τῆς μὲν Ἰουδαίας γῆς ἀπεληλαμένων, ἐπὶ δὲ τῇ τοῦ κηρύγματος διδασκαλίᾳ τὴν εἰς σύμπαντα τὰ ἔθνη στειλαμένων πορείαν σὺν δυνάμει τοῦ Χριστοῦ, φήσαντος αὐτοῖς“ πορευθέντες μαθητεύσατε πάντα τὰ ἔθνη ἐν τῷ ὀνόματί μου, οὐ aswe go onourway the chronological detailsofthe succession of the Apostles will be related, but at present let us go on to the next stage of the narrative.
 V.
 Αfter Νero had held the sovereignty for thirteen years1 the affairs of Galba and Otho 2 occupied a year and six months,and then Vespasian, who haddistinguished himself intheoperationsagainst the Jews, was proclaimed Imperator by the army there and appointed Emperor in Judaea itself.
 Ηe at oncesetoff for Romeandentrusted the war againstthe Jews tohisson Titus.
 Now after the ascension of our Saviour in addition to their crime against him the Jews at onee contrivednumberless plots against his disciples.
 Stephen was first stoned to death by them and next after him James,the son of Zebedee andbrotherof John, was beheaded.
 3 In additiontoall, James, who was the first after the ascension οf our Saviour to be appointed to the throne of the bishopric in Jerusalem, paried away in the manner deseribed above and the other Apostles were driven from the land of Judaea by thousands of deadly Ρlots.
 They went on their way to all the heathen teaching their mesage in the power of Christ for he had said to them,“ Goand make disciples of all the heathen in my” 4 Ontheother hand, the μὴν ἀλλὰ καὶ τοῦ λαοῦ τῆς ἐν Ἱεροσολύμοις ἐκκλησίας κατά τινα χρησμὸν τοῖς αὐτόθι δοκίμοις δι’ ἀποκαλύψεως ἐκδοθέντα πρὸ τοῦ πολέμου μεταναστῆναι τῆς πόλεως καί τινα τῆς Περαίας πόλιν οἰκεῖν κεκελευσμένου, Πέλλαν αὐτὴν ὀνομάζουσιν, ἐν ἧ τῶν εἰς Χριστὸν ἀπὸ τῆς Ἱερουσαλὴμ μετῳκισμένων, ὡς ἂν παντελῶς ἐπιλελοιπότων ἁγίων ἀνδρῶν αὐτήν τε τὴν Ἰουδαίων βασιλικὴν μητρόπολιν καὶ σύμπασαν τὴν Ἰουδαίαν γῆν, ἡ ἐκ θεοῦ δίκη λοιπὸν αὐτοὺς ἄτε τοσαῦτα εἴς τε τὸν Χριστὸν καὶ τοὺς ἀποστόλους αὐτοῦ παρηνομηκότας μετῄει, τῶν ἀσεβῶν ἄρδην τὴν γενεὰν αὐτὴν ἐκείνην ἐξ ἀνθρώπων ἀφανίζουσα.
 δάα μὲν οὖν τηνικάδε κατὰ πάντα τόπον ὅλῳ τῷ ἔθνει συνερρύη κακά, ὅπως τε μάλιστα οἱ τῆς Ἰουδαίας οἰκήτορες εἰς ἔσχατα περιηλάθησαν συμφορῶν, ὁπόσαι τε μυριάδες ἡβηδὸν γυναιξὶν ἅμα καὶ παισὶ ξίφει καὶ λιμῷ καὶ μυρίοις ἄλλοις εἴδεσι περιπεπτώκασιν θανάτου, πόλεων τε Ἰουδαϊκῶν ὅσαι τε καὶ οἷαι γεγόνασιν πολιορκίαι, ἀλλὰ καὶ ὁπόσα οἱ ἐπ’ αὐτὴν Ἱερουσαλὴμ ὡς ἄν ἐπὶ μητρόπολιν ὀχυρωτάτην καταπεφευγότες δεινὰ καὶ πέρα δεινῶν ἑοράκασι, τοῦ τε παντὸς πολέμου τὸν τρόπον καὶ τῶν ἐν τούτῳ γεγενημένων ἐν μέρει ἕκαστα, καὶ ὡς ἐπὶ τέλει τὸ πρὸς τῶν προφητῶν ἀνηγορευμένον βδέλυγμα τῆς ἐρημώσεως ἐν αὐτῷ κατέστη τῷ πάλαι τοῦ θεοῦ περιβοήτῳ νεῷ, παντελῆ φθορὰν καὶ ἀφανισμὸν ἔσχατον τὸν διὰ πυρὸς ὑπομείναντι, πάρεστιν ὅτῳ φίλον, ἐπ’ ἀκριβὲς ἐκ τῆς τῷ Ἰωσήπῳ γραφείσης ἀναλέξασθαι ἰατορίας·
 ὡς δὲ ὁ αὐτὸς οὗτος τῶν ἀθροισθέντων ἀπὸ τῆς Ἰουδαίας Ἰουδαίας ἐν ἡμέραις τῆς people οf the churchin Jerusalem were commandedby an oracle givenby revelation before the war to those in the city who were worthy of it to depart and dwell in one οf the cities of Perea which they called Ρella.
 To it those who believed on Christ migrated from Jerusalem, that when holy men had altogether deserted the royal eapital of the Jews and the Whole land of Judaea, the judgement of God might at last overtake them for all their crimes against the Christ and his Apostles, and all that generation οf the wicked be utterly blotted out from among men.
 Those who wish can retrace accurately from the history written by Josephus how many evils at that timeoverwhelmedthe whole nation in every place and especially how the inhabitants οf Judaea were driven to the last point of suffering, how manythousandsοf youths, women, and children perished by the sword,by famine,and by countless other forms of death;
 they ean read how many and what famous Jewishcitieswere besieged,and Rnally how terrors and worse than terrors were seen by those who fled to Jerusalem as if toa mighty capital;
 they can study the nature οfthe whole war, all the details οf what happened in it, and how at theendthe abomination of deSolation spoken of by the prophets was set up in the very templeof God, for all its ancient fame, and it perished utteriy and passed away in flames.
 But it is neceSSary to point οut how the same writer estimates at three millions the τοῦ πάσχα ἑορτῆς ωσπερ ἐν εἰρκτῇ ῥήμασιν αὐτοῖς ἀποκλεισθῆναι εἰς τὰ Ἱεροσόλυμα ἀμφὶ τριακοσίας μυριάδας τὸ πλῆθος ἱστορεῖ, ἀναγκαῖον ὑποσημήνασθαι.
 χρῆν δ’ οὖν ἐν αἷς ἡμέραις τὸν πάντων σωτῆρα καὶ εὐεργέτην Χριστόν τε τοῦ θεοῦ τὰ κατὰ τὸ πάθος διατέθεινται, ταῖς αὐταῖς ὥσπερ ἐν εἱρκτὴ κατακλεισθέντας τὸν μετελθόντα αὐτοὺς ὄλεθρον πρὸς τῆς θείας δίκης καταδέξασθαι.
 Παρελθὼν δὴ τὰ τῶν ἐν μέρει συμβεβηκότων αὐτοῖς ὅσα διὰ ξίφους καὶ ἄλλῳ τρόπῳ κατ’ αὐτῶν ἐγκεχείρηται, μόνας τὰς διὰ τοῦ λιμοῦ ἀναγκαῖον ἡγοῦμαι συμφορὰς παραθέσθαι, ὡς ἂν ἐκ μέρους ἔχοιεν οἱ τῇδε τῇ γραφῆ ἐντυγχάνοντες εἰδέναι ὅπως αὐτοὺς τῆς εἰς τὸν Χριστὸν τοῦ θεοῦ παρανομίας οὐκ εἰς μακρὸν ἡ ἐκ θεοῦ μετῆλθεν τιμωρία.
 VI.
 φέρε δὴ οὖν, τῶν Ἱστοριῶν τὴν πέμπτην τοῦ Ἰωσήπου μετὰ χεῖρας αὖθις ἀναλαβών, τῶν τότε πραχθέντων δίελθε τὴν τραγῳδίαν·
 “ τοῖς γε μὴν εὐπόροις’’ φησί“ καὶ τὸ μένειν πρὸς ἀπωλείας ἴσον ἢν·
 γὰρ αὐτομολίας ἀνῃρεῖτό τις διὰ τὴν οὐσίαν.
 τῷ Λιμῷ δ’ ἢ ἀπόνοια τῶν στασιαστῶν συνήκμαζεν, καὶ καθ’ ἡμέραν ἀμφότερα προσεξεκάετο τὰ δεινά.
 φανερὸς μέν γε οὐδαμοῦ οῖτος ἢν, ἐπεισπηδῶντες δὲ διηρεύνων τὰς οἰκίας, ἔπειθ’ εὑρόντες μὲν ὡς ἀρνησαμένους ᾐκίζοντο, μὴ εὑ·
 ρόντες δὲ ὡς ἐπιμελέστερον κρύψαντας ἐβασάνιζον.
 τεκμήριον δὲ τοῦτ’ ἔχειν καὶ μή, τὰ σώματα τῶν ἀθλίων·
 ὧν οἱ μὲν ἔτι συνεστῶτες εὐπορεῖν τροφῆς ἐδόκουν, οἱ τηκόμενοι δὲ ἤδη παρωδεύοντο, καὶ κτείνειν ἄλογον ἐδόκει τοὺς ὑπ’ ἐνδείας number οf those who in the days of the Feart of the Passover thronged Jerusalem from all Judaea and, to use his own words, were shut up as if in prison.
 Ιt vas indeed right that on the same day on which they had perpetrated the passion of the Saviour and benefactor of all men and the Chrit of God they sholrid be, as it were shut up in prison and reeeiVe the destruetiOn which pursued them from the sentence of God.
 Omitting then the details of their misfortunes from the sword and otherwise,Ι think it necessary to adduce only their sufferings from famine in order that those who study this work may have some partial knowledge of how the punishment of God follOWed close after them for their crime against the Christ of God.
 VI.
 Come then, take up again the fifth book of the history of Josephus and go through the tragedy of what was then done.
“ For the’’ he says,“ to remainwasequal to destruction, since for the sake oftheirproperty they were murdered on the chargeof intended desertion.
 But the madneb of the rebels grew with the famine, and the terror of both blazed more fiercely day by day.
 No cornwasvisible anywhere, but they burst into houses and searched them.
 Then, if theyfound any, they tormentedthe inmates for their denying;
 if not theytortured then for having hidden it too earefully.
 The bodies of the miserable creatures were evidence whether they had it or not.
 Those who were still in health seemed to be provided with food, while those who were already wasted away were passed by, and it seemed unreasonable to kill τεθνηξομένους αὐτίκα.
 πολλοὶ δὲ λάθρα τὰς κτήσεις ἑνὸς ἀντικατηλλάξαντο μέτρου, πυρῶν μέν, εἰ πλουσιώτεροι τυγχάνοιεν ὄντες, οἱ δὲ πενέστεροι κριθῆς·
 ἔπειτα κατακλείοντες ἑαυτοὺς εἰς τὰ μυχαίτατα τῶν οἰκιῶν, τινὲς μὲν ὑπ’ ἄκρας ἐνδείας ἀνέργαστον τὸν σῖτον ἤσθιον, οἳ δ᾿ ἔπεσσον ὡς ἥ τε ἀνάγκη καὶ τὸ δέος παρῄνει, καὶ τράπεζα μὲν οὐδαμοῦ παρετίθετο, τοῦ δὲ πυρὸς ὑφέλκοντες ἔτ᾿ ὠμὰ τὰ σιτία διήρπαζον.
 ἐλεεινὴ δ᾿ ἦν ἡ τροφὴ καὶ δακρύων ἄξιος ἡ θέα, τῶν μὲν δυνατωτέρων πλεονεκτούντων, τῶν δὲ ἀσθενῶν ὀδυρομένων.
 πάντων μὲν δὴ παθῶν ὑπερίσταται λιμός, οὐδὲν δ᾿ οὕτως ἀπόλλυσιν ὡς αἰδῶ1.
 τὸ γὰρ ἄλλως ἐντροπῆς ἄξιον ἐν τούτῳ καταφρονεῖται.
 γυναῖκες γοῦν ἀνδρῶν καὶ παῖδες πατέρων καί, τὸ ἀκτρότατον, μητέρες νηπίων ἐξήρπαζον ἐξ αὐτῶν τῶν στομάτων τὰς τροφάς, καὶ τῶν φιλτάτων ἐν χερσὶ μαραινομένων οὐκ ἦν φειδὼ τοὺς τοῦ ζῆν ἀφελέσθαι σταλαγμούς.
 τοιαῦτα δ᾿ ἐσθίοντες, ὅμως οὐ διελάνθανον, πανταχοῦ δ᾿ ἐφίσταντο οἱ στασιασταὶ καὶ τούτων ταῖς ἁρπαγαῖς.
 ὁπότε γὰρ κατίδοιεν ἀποκεκλεισμένην οἰκίαν, σημεῖον ἦν τοῦτο τοὺ ςἔνδον προσφέρεσθαι τροφήν, εὐθέως δ᾿ ἐξαράξαντες τὰς θύρας εἰσεπήδων, καὶ μόνον οὐκ ἐκ τῶν φαρύγγων ἀναθλίδβοντες τὰς ἀκόλους ἀνέφερον.
 ἐτύπτοντο δὲ γέροντες ἀντεχόμενοι τῶν σιτίων, καὶ κόμης ἐσπαράσσοντο γυναῖκες συγκαλύπτουσαι τὰ ἐν χερσίν, οὐδέ τις ἦν οἶκτος πολιᾶς ἢ νηπίων, ἀλλὰ συνεπαίροντες τὰ παιδία τῶν ψωμῶν ἐκκρεμάμενα κατέσειον εἰς ἔδαφος.
 τοῖς δὲ φθάσασι thosewho would soon die of need.
 Μany secretly exchanged their property fora single measure or wheat, if they were richer,of barley,if they were poorer.
 Then, shutting themselves up in the inmost recesses of their houSes, some, in the extremity of their want, would eat the grain unprepared, others would cook it as necessity and fear dietated.
 No table wasset anyWhere,but snatching it from the fire they tore in pieces the still uncooked food.
 Their living was pitiable, and their appearance worthy of tears;
 the strong plundered and the weak wailed.
 Famine truly surpasses all sufferings, but it destroys nothing so muchas shame 1;
 for what is at othertimes worthy of respect is despised in famine;
 women took the food from the very mouths of their husbands, children from their fathers, and, most piteous of all, mothers from their children, and while their deareSt were wasting away before them there WaS no scruple in taking away the last drop of life.
 Yet they did not escape detection When they thus ate, but everywhere the rioters arose to rob them evenof this;
 for whenever they Saw a house Shut up it wasa sign that those within had obtained food and at onee they tore down the doors, ruShed in, and seized the morSelS, almost squeering them out of their throats.
 Old men were beaten for withholding food, and Women were dragged by the hair for concealing it in their hands.
 There Was no pity for grey- headed age orforlittle children,but they picked up babies clinging to crusts and dashed them on the floor.
 τὴν εἰσδρομὴν αὐτῶν καὶ προκαταπιοῦσιν τὸ ἁρπαγησόμενον ὡς ἀδικηθέντες ἦσαν ὠμότεροι, δεινὰς δὲ βασάνων ὁδοὺς ἐπενόουν πρὸς ἔρευναν τροφῆς, ὀρόβοις μὲν ἐμφράττοντες τοῖς ἀθλίοις τοὺς τῶν αἰδοίων πόρους, ῥάβδοις δ’ ὀξείαις ἀναπείροντες τὰς ἕδρας·
 τὰ φρικτὰ δὲ καὶ ἀκοαῖς ἔπασχέ τις εἰς ἐξομολόγησιν ἑνὸς ἄρτου καὶ ἵνα μηνύσῃ δράκα μίαν κεκρυμμένων ἀλφίτων.
 οἱ βασανισταὶ δ’ οὐδ’ ἐπείνων καὶ γὰρ ἦττον ἂν ὠμὸν ἦν τὸ μετὰ ἀνάγκης), γυμνάζοντες δὲ τὴν ἀπόνοιαν καὶ προπαρασκευάζοντες ἑαυτοῖς εἰς τὰς ἑξῆς ἡμέρας ἐφόδια.
 τοῖς δ’ ἐπὶ τὴν‘ Ρωμαίων φρουρὰν νύκτωρ ἐξερπύσασιν ἐπὶ λαχάνων συλλογὴν ἀγρίων καὶ πόας ὑπαντῶντες, ὅτ’ ἤδη διαπεφευγέναι τοὺς πολεμίους ἐδόκουν, ἀφήρπαζον τὰ κομισθέντα, καὶ πολλάκις ἱκετευόντων καὶ τὸ φρικτότατον ἐπικαλουμένων ὄνομα τοῦ θεοῦ μεταδοῦναί τι μέρος αὐτοῖς ὧν κινδυνεύσαντες ἤνεγκαν, οὐδ’ ὁτιοῦν μετέδοσαν, ἀγαπητὸν δ’ ἢν τὸ μὴ καὶ προσαπολέσθαι σεσυλημένον.
 ” ούτοις μεθ’ ἕτερα ἐπιφέρει λέγων·
 “ Ἰουδαίοις δὲ μετὰ τῶν ἐξόδων ἀπεκόπη πᾶσα σωτηρίας ἐλπίς, καὶ βαθύνας ἑαυτὸν ὁ λιμὸς κατ’ οἴκους καὶ γενεὰς τὸν δῆμον ἐπεβόσκετο, καὶ τὰ μὲν τέγη πεπλήρωτο γυναικῶν καὶ βρεφῶν λελυμένων, οἱ στενωποὶ δὲ γερόντων νεκρῶν, παῖδες δὲ καὶ νεανίαι διοιδοῦντες ὥσπερ εἴδωλα κατὰ τὰς ἀγορὰς ἀνειλοῦντο καὶ κατέπιπτον ὅπη τινὰ τὸ πάθος καταλαμβάνοι.
 θάπτειν δὲ τοὺς προσήκοντας οὔτε ἴσχυον οἱ κάμνοντες καὶ τὸ διευ- To those who hadanticipated their entry, and had gulped down their expected prey, they werethe more cruel, as though they had been injured by them.
 For the ffiscovery of food they sought for terrible methods of torture, sewing up their victims and inmpaling them on sharp stakes.
 Men suffered things terrible even to hear to secure the confession ofa single loaf, and to disclosea single pint of hidden barley.
 But the torturers suKered no hunger( and indeed theircruelty would have been less hadit been from neeessity) but there was method in their madness and they prorided sustenanee for themselves for days to come.
 When some crept out by night as far as the Roman lines to gather wild herbs and grass, they intercepted them when they thought that they had at last escapedthe enemy, plundered them of what they were carrying, and for all their many entreaties and invocations of the awful name οf God to give them some share οf what they had brought at their οwn risk, they gave them nothing whatever, and he Who Was robbed was lueky not to be murdered too.
” Αfter some οther details he continues:
“ Νow When all hope of safety was cut off from the Jews by the closing of the exits from the city and famine deepening from house to house and family to family was eating up the people, the roomswerefilled with dead womenand children andthe alley— ways the corpses of old men.
 Boys and young men, wandering 1 like ghosts through the market— place, were seimd by death and lay each where the blow had stricken him.
 The sick had no strength to burysufferersfrom famine, not of ghosb( and the text seems corrupt).
 Or it maybe“ swllen yet ghost— like ghost— like’’ τονοῦν ὤκνει διά τε τὸ πλῆθος τῶν νεκρῶν καὶ τὸ κατὰ ἁφᾶς ἄδηλον·
 πολλοὶ γοῦν τοῖς ὑπ’ αὐτῶν θαπτομένοις ἐπαπέθνῃσκον, πολλοὶ δ’ ἐπὶ τὰς θήκας, πρὶν ἐπιστῆναι τὸ χρεών, προῆλθον.
 οὔτε δὲ θρῆνος ἐν ταῖς συμφοραῖς οὔτε ὀλοφυρμοὸς ἢν, ἀλλ’ ὁ λιμὸς ἤλεγχε τὰ πάθη, ξηροῖς δὲ τοῖς ὄμμασιν οἱ δυσθανατοῦντες ἐθεώρουν τοὺς φθάσαντας ἀναπαύσασθαι, βαθεῖα δὲ τὴν πόλιν περιεῖχεν σιγὴ καὶ νὺξ θανάτου γέμουσα.
 καὶ τούτων οἱ λῃσταὶ χαλεπώτεροι.
 τυμβωρυχοῦντες γοῦν τὰς οἰκίας, ἐσύλων τοὺς νεκρούς, καὶ τὰ καλύμματα τῶν σωμάτων περισπῶντες, μετὰ γέλωτος ἐξήεσαν, τάς τε ἀκμὰς τῶν ξιφῶν ἐδοκίμαζον ἐν τοῖς πτώμασιν, καί τινας τῶν ἐρριμμένων ἔτι ζῶντας διήλαυνον ἐπὶ πείρᾳ τοῦ σιδήρου, τοὺς δ’ ἱκετεύοντας χρῆσαι σφίσιν δεξιὰν καὶ ξίφος, τῷ Λιμῷ κατέλιπον ὑπερηφανοῦντες, καὶ τῶν ἐκπνεόντων ἕκαστος ἀτενὲς εἰς τὸν ναὸν ἀφεώρα, τοὺς στασιαστὰς ζῶντας ἀπολιπών.
 οἳ δὲ τὸ μὲν πρῶτον ἐκ τοῦ δημοσίου θησαυροῦ τοὺς νεκροὺς θάπτειν ἐκέλευον, τὴν ὀσμὴν οὐ φέροντες·
 ὡς οὐ διήρκουν, ἀπὸ τῶν τειχῶν ἐρρίπτουν εἰς τὰς φάραγγας.
 περιιὼν δὲ ταύτας ὁ Τίτος ὡς ἐθεάσατο πεπλησμένας τῶν νεκρῶν καὶ βαθὺν ἰχῶρα μυδώντων τὸν ὑπορρέοντα τῶν σωμάτων, ἐστέναξέν τε καὶ τὰς χεῖρας ἀνατείνας κατεμαρτύρατο τὸν θεόν, ὡς οὐκ εἴη τὸ ἔργον αὐτοῦ. ’
 ’ Τούτοις τούτοις ἐπειπών τινα μεταξὺ ἐπιφέρει λέγων·
“ οὐκ ἂν ὑποστειλαίμην εἰπεῖν ἅ μοι κελεύει τὸ πάθος·
 οἶμαι Ῥωμαίων βραδυνάντων ἐπὶ τοὺς ἀλιτηρίους, ἢ καταποθῆναι ἂν ὑπὸ χάσματος ἢ κατακλυσθῦναι τὴν πόλιν ἢ τοὺς τῆς Σοδομηνῆς their families and the strong heritated for the number of the dead and their own doubtful fate.
 Many indeed fell in death on those whom they were burying and many went to their graves before the necessity arose.
 There was no lamentation or wailing at losses, but famine overcame emotion and those who were dying in misery looked with dry eyes on those Who had found rest before them.
 Deep silence and night pregnant with death encompassed the city.
 Worse than these were the robbers.
 Breaking into houses like body- snatchers they robbedthe dead, tearing the garments from their bodies, and went out with laughter.
 They tried the edge of their Swords on the corpses, and to prove the steel ran through some of the fallen who were still alive, but those who begged for the kindliness ofa mortal blow they left in contempt to the famine.
 These all died with eyes fixed on the temple and lert the rebelsto life.
 Αt first orders were giVen to bury the dead at the public expense because of the unbearable stench;
 then afterwards when this was impracticable they Were thrown from the walls into the trenches.
 When Titus, going roundthe trenches,saw then full of thedeadand the thick gore oozing fromthe rotting bodies, he groaned, and raising his hand called God to witness that this was not his doing.
” Αfter a little more he goes on:
“Ι cannot refrain from stating what emotion bids me.
Ι think that had the Roman delayed their attack on the scoundrels the city would haVe been engulfed by the earth opening or overwhelmed bya flood or shared the μεταλαβεῖν κεραυνούς·
 πολὺ γὰρ τῶν ταῦτα παθόντων ἤνεγκεν γενεὰν ἀθεωτέραν·
 τῆ γοῦν τούτων ἀπονοίᾳ πᾶς ὁ λαὸς συναπώλετο.
” Καὶ ἐν τῷ ἕκτῳ δὲ βιβλίῳ οὕτως γράφει.
 “ τῶν δ’ ὑπὸ τοῦ Λιμοῦ φθειρομένων κατὰ τὴν πόλιν ἄπειρον μὲν ἔπιπτε τὸ πλῆθος, ἀδιήγητα δὲ συνέβαινεν τὰ πάθη.
 καθ’ ἑκάστην γὰρ οἰκίαν, εἴ που τροφῆς παραφανείη σκιά, πόλεμος ἦν, καὶ διὰ χειρῶν ἐχώρουν οἱ φίλτατοι πρὸς ἀλλήλους, ἐξαρπάζοντες τὰ ταλαίπωρα τῆς ψυχῆς ἐφόδια, πίστιςδ’ ἀπορίας οὐδὲ τοῖς θνῄσκουσιν ἦν, ἀλλὰ καὶ τοὺς ἐμπνέοντας οἱ λῃσταὶ διηρεύνων, μή τις ὑπὸ κόλπον ἔχων τροφήν, σκήπτοιτο τὸν θάνατον αὐτῷ.
 οἳ δ’ ὑπ’ ἐνδείας κεχηνότες ὥσπερ λυσσῶντες κύνες ἐσφάλλοντο καὶ παρεφέροντο ταῖς τε θύραις ἐνσειόμενοι μεθυόντων τρόπον καὶ ὑπ’ ἀμηχανίας τοὺς αὐτοὺς οἴκους εἰσεπήδων δὶς ἢ τρὶς ὥρᾳ μιᾷ.
 πάντα δ’ ὑπ’ ὀδόντας ἦγεν ἡ ἀνάγκη, καὶ τὰ μηδὲ τοῖς ῥυπαρωτάτοις τῶν ἀλόγων ζῴων πρόσφορα συλλέγοντες ἐσθίειν ὑπέφερον.
 ζωστήρων γοῦν καὶ ὑποδημάτων τὸ τελευταῖον οὐκ ἀπέσχοντο καὶ τὰ δέρματα τῶν θυρεῶν ἀποδέροντες ἐμασῶντο, τροφὴ δ’ ἢν καὶ χόρτου τισὶν παλαιοῦ σπαράγματα·
 τὰς γὰρ ἶνας ἔνιοι συλλέγοντες, ἐλάχιστον σταθμὸν ἐπώλουν Ἀττικῶν τεσσάρων.
“ Καὶ τί δεῖ τὴν ἐπ’ ἀψύχοις ἀναίδειαν τοῦ λιμοῦ λέγειν;
 εἶμι γὰρ αὐτοῦ δηλώσων ἔργον ὁποῖον μήτε παρ’ Ἕλλησιν μήτε παρὰ βαρβάροις ἱστόρηται, φρικτὸν μὲν εἰπεῖν, ἄπιστον δ’ ἀκοῦσαι.
 καὶ ἔγωγε, μὴ δόξαιμι τερατεύεσθαι τοῖς αὖθις ἀνθρώποις, κἂν παρέλιπον τὴν συμφορὰν ἡδέως,thunderboltsof Sodom, for it had brought fortha generation far more ungodly than those who thus suffered.
 It was by their madness that the whole people perished.
” In the sixth bookhe writes thus:
“ Οf those who perished in the city from the famine the number which fell was countless and their sufferings indescribable.
 For in each house if there appearedthe very shadow οf food therewas fighting,and the dearest friends wrestled together for it, snatching the miserable sustenance of life.
 Νor were even the dying believedtobe destitute, but while they were still breathing the robbers searched them, lest any should feign death while having food on his person.
 others, gaping from lack of food, stumbled and hurried along like mad dogs, beating at the doors like drunken men, and rushing two or three times in a single hour into the same houses from sheer incompetence.
 Necessity brought all things to men's teeth and they endured eatinga collection of scraps unnt for the ffithieSt of brute beasts.
 Αt the last they abstained not even from belts and shoes and gnawed the hides stripped off their shieldS.
 Some fed on wisps ofold straw, others collected Stubble and solda tiny portion for four Attic drachmae.
 1 “ But what need is there to Speak of the shamelessness οf the famine towards inanimate things?I purpose to relatea consequenee of it suchashas been narrated neitherbythe Greeks norby the barbarians,horrible to tell, ineredible to hear.
I myself would have gladly omitted the tragedy to avoid εἰ μὴ τῶν κατ’ ἐμαυτὸν εἶχον ἀπείρους μάρτυρας·
 ἄλλως τε καὶ ψυχρὰν ἂν καταθείμην τῆ πατρίδι χάριν, καθυφέμενος τὸν λόγον ὧν πέπονθε τὰ ἔργα.
 γυνὴ τῶν ὑπὲρ Ἰορδάνην κατοικούντων, Μαρία τοὔνομα, πατρὸς Ἐλεαζάρου, κώμης Βαθεζώρ( σημαίνει δὲ τοῦτο οἶκος ὑσσώπου), γένος καὶ πλοῦτον ἐπίσημος, μετὰ τοῦ λοιποῦ πλήθους εἰς τὰ Ἱεροσόλυμα καταφυγοῦσα συνεπολιορκεῖτο.
 ταύτης τὴν μὲν ἄλλην κτῆσιν οἱ τύραννοι διήρπασαν, ὅσην ἐκ τῆς Περαίας ἀνασκευασαμένη μετήνεγκεν εἰς τὴν πόλιν, τὰ δὲ λείψανα τῶν κειμηλίων καὶ1 εἴ τι τροφῆς ἐπινοηθείη καθ’ ἡμέραν εἰσπηδῶντες ἥρπαζον οἱ δορυφόροι.
 δεινὴ δὲ τὸ γύναιον ἀγανάκτησις εἰσῄει, καὶ πολλάκις λοιδοροῦσα καὶ καταρωμένη τοὺς ἅρπαγας ἐφ’ ἑαυτὴν ἠρέθιζεν.
 ὡς δ’ οὔτε παροξυόμενός τις οὔτ’ ἐλεῶν αὐτὴν ἀνῄρει καὶ τὸ μὲν εὑρεῖν τι σιτίον ἄλλοις ἐκοπία, πανταχόθενδ’ ἄπορον ἦν ἤδη καὶ τὸ εὑρεῖν, ὁ λιμὸς δὲ διὰ σπλάγχνων καὶ μυελῶν ἐχώρει καὶ τοῦ λιμοῦ μᾶλλον ἐξέκαιον οἱ θυμοί, σύμβουλον λαβοῦσα τὴν ὀργὴν μετὰ τῆς ἀνάγκης, ἐπὶ τὴν φύσιν ἐχώρει, καὶ τὸ τέκνον, ἢν δ’ αὐτῇ παῖς ὑπομάστιος, ἁρπασαμένη,‘ βέφος,’ εἷπεν,ἴ’ ἄθλιον, ἐν πολέμῳ καὶ λιμῷ καὶ στάσει, τίνι ἄε τηρῶ;
 τὰ μὲν παρὰ Ῥωμαίοις δουλεία κἂν ζήσωμεν ἐπ’ αὐτούς, φθάνει δὲ καὶ δουλείαν ὁ λιμός, οἱ στασιασταὶ δὲ ἀμφοτέρων χαλεπώτεροι.
 ἴθι, γενοῦ μοι τροφὴ καὶ τοῖς στασιασταῖς ἐρινὺς καὶ τῷ βίῳ μῦθος, ὁ μόνος ἐλλείπων ταῖς Ἰουδαίων συμφοραῖς.
' καὶ ταῦθ’ ἅμα λέγουσα κτείνει τὸν υἱόν, ἔπειτ’ ὀπτήσασα, τὸ μὲν ἥμισυ κατεσθίει, τὸ δὲ λοιπὸν appearing to posterity to fabricate legend hadI not had coulrtless vitneses to it in my own generation.
 CertainlyI should render cold comfort to my country WereI to compromise the account of her sufferings.
 There was a woman among those who lived beyond Jordan named Mary whose father was Eliezer of the village Bathezor( which means“ House of”).
 She was famous for her family and Wealth, and having fled with the rest of the populationto Jerusalem was eaught in the Siege.
 The tyrants seized all her other possessions which she had brought from Peraea and carried into the city, and the guards rushed in daily and seized the iemnants of her property and any food which they perceived.
 Fierce indignation seized the woman and by her frequent abuseS and curses she tried to irritate the robbers against herSelf.
 But when no one killed her either in anger or pity and she wearied of finding food for others, and indeed it was now impossible to do so anywhere, famine entered into her heart and marrow, and rage burnt more fiercely than famine.
 Anger and neceSsity were her councillors:
 she turned against nature and seized her child,a boy whom She was suckling.
‘ Miserable infant,’ she said,‘ amid war, famine,and rebellion for what 1 am I keeping you? Slavery among the Romans faces us if they give us our liveS;
 famine is overtaking slavery;
 the rebelS are worse than both.
 Come, be foodfor me, an avenging furyto the rebels, and the one story still lacking to the sufferings of the Jews to be told to the world.’
 With these words she her son, and then cooked him, ate half, and covered κατακαλύψασα ἐφύλαττεν.
 εὐθέως δ’ οἱ στασιασταὶ παρῆσαν καὶ τῆς ἀθεμίτου κνίσης σπάσαντες, ἠπείλουν, εἰ μὴ δείξειεν τὸ παρασκευασθέν, ἀποσφάξειν αὐτὴν εὐθέως·
 ἢ δὲ καὶ μοῖ· ’
 ρᾶν αὐτοῖς εἰποῦσα καλὴν τετηρηκέναι, τὰ λείψανα τοῦ τέκνου διεκάλυψεν.
 τοὺς δ’ εὐθέως φρίκη καὶ φρενῶν ἔκστασις ᾕρει, καὶ παρὰ τὴν ὄφιν ἐπεπήγεσαν.
 ἢ δ’,‘ ἐμόν,’ ἔφη,‘ τοῦτο τὸ τέκνον γνήσιον, καὶ τὸ ἔργον ἐμόν.
 φάγετε, καὶ γὰρ ἐγὼ βέβρωκα·
 μὴ γένησθε μήτε μαλακώτεροι γυναικὸς μήτε συμπαθέστεροι μητρός.
 εἰ δ’ ὑμεῖς εὐσεβεῖς καὶ τὴν ἐμὴν ἀποστρέφεσθε ἐγὼ μὲν ὑμῖν βέβρωκα, καὶ τὸ λοιπὸνδ’ ἐμοὶ μεινάτω. ’
 μετὰ ταῦθ’ οἳ μὲν τρέμοντες ἐξῄεσαν, πρὸς ἓν τοῦτο δειλοὶ καὶ μόλις ταύτης τῆς τροφῆς τῆ μητρὶ παραχωρήσαντες, ἀνεπλήσθη δ’ εὐθέως ὅλη τοῦ μύσους ἡ πόλις, καὶ πρὸ ὀμμάτων ἕκαστος τὸ πάθος λαμβάνων ὡς παρ’ αὐτῷ τολμηθέν, ἔφριττεν.
 σπουδὴ δὲ τῶν λιμωττόντων ἐπὶ τὸν θάνατον ἢν καὶ μακαρισμὸς τῶν φθασάντων πρὶν ἀκοῦσαι καὶ θεάσασθαι κακὰ τηλικαῦτα.
” VII.
 τοιαῦτα τῆς Ἰουδαίων εἰς τὸν Χριστὸν τοῦ θεοῦ παρανομίας τε καὶ δυσσεβείας τἀπίχειρα, παραθεῖναι δ’ αὐτοῖς ἄξιον καὶ τὴν ἀψευδῆ τοῦ σωτῆρος ἡμῶν πρόρρησιν, δι’ ἦς αὐτὰ ταῦτα δηλοῖ ὧδέ πως προφητεύων“ οὐαὶ δὲ ταῖς γαστρὶ ἐχούσαις καὶ ταῖς θηλαζούσαις ἐν ἐκείναις ταῖς ἡμέραις·
 προσεύχεδθε δὲ ἵνα μὴ γένηται ὑμῶν ἢ φυγὴ χειμῶνος μηδὲ σαββάτῳ.
 ἔσται γὰρ τότε θλῖψις μεγάλη, οἵα οὐκ ἐγένετο ἀπ’ ἀρχῆς κόσμου ἕως τοῦ νῦν, οὐδὲ μὴ γένηται.
 ” συναγαγὼν δὲ πάντα τὸν τῶν ἀνηρημένων ἀριθμὸν up and keptthe rest.
 Αt that moment the rebels came and smelling the horrible savour, threatened to kill her at onee if they were not given what she had made ready.
 she told them that rile had kepta good helping for them and uncovered the remains of the child.
 Αs for them, horror and amazement seized them at once, and they stood transfixed at the sight,but She said,‘ This was my own child and the deed is mine.
 Eat, forImyself have eaten.
 Do not bemore squeamish thana woman,or compassionate thana mother.
 But if you have scruples, and turn away from my sacrifice, WhatI have eaten was your share, let the rest remain for me.’
 Αt theywentout trembling, for only thiS made them coWards, and they scarcely yielded eVen thiS food to the mother;
 but the Whole eity waS at once ffiled with the horror, and each, holding the tragedy before hiS eyes, shuddered as if ithad been his own crime.
 And the sufferers from the famine sought for death and pronounced those blessed whom it had reached before they heard or saw such awful evils.
” VII.
 Such was the reward of the iniquity of the Jews and of their impiety against the ChriSt of God,but it is worth appendingto it the infallible foreeast of our saviour in which he prophetically expounded these very—“ woe unto them that are with child and give suekin those days,but pray that your ffight be not inthe winter norona sabbath day,for there Shall then be great affliction such as was not from the beginning of the world until now, nor shall be.
 ” Αnd the historian, estimating the whole ὁ συγγραφεὺς λιμῷ καὶ ξίφει μυριάδας ἑκατὸν καὶ δέκα διαφθαρῆναί φησιν, τοὺς δὲ λοιποὺς στασιώδεις καὶ λῃστρικούς, ὑπ’ ἀλλήλων μετὰ τὴν ἅλωσιν ἐνδεικνυμένους, μένους, ἀνηρῆσθαι, τῶν δὲ νέων τοὺς ὑψηλοάτους καὶ κάλλει διαφέροντας τετηρῆσθαι θριάμβῳ, τοῦ δὲ λοιποῦ πλήθους τοὺς ὑπὲρ ἑπτακαίδεκα ἔτη δεσμίους εἰς τὰ κατ’ Αἴγυπτον ἔργα παραπεμφθῆναι, πλείους δὲ εἰς τὰς ἐπαρχίας διανενεμῆσθαι φθαρησομένους ἐν τοῖς θεάτροις σιδήρῳ καὶ θηρίοις, τοὺς δ’ ἐντὸς ἑπτακαίδεκα ἐτῶν αἰχμαλώτους ἀχθέντας διαπεπρᾶσθαι, τούτων δὲ μόνων τὸν ἀριθμὸν εἰς ἐννέα μυριάδας ἀνδρῶν συναχθῆναι.
 Ταῦτα δὲ τοῦτον ἐπράχθη τὸν τρόπον δευτέρῳ τῆς Οὐεσπασιανοῦ βασιλειᾶς ἔτει ἀκολούθως ταῖς προγνωστικαῖς τοῦ κυρίου καὶ σωτῆρος ἡμῶν Ἰησοῦ Χριστοῦ προρρήσεσιν, θείᾳ δυνάμει ὥσπερ ἤδη παρόντα προεορακότος αὐτὰ ἐπιδακρύσαντός τε καὶ ἀποκλανσαμένου κατὰ τὴν τῶν ἱερῶν εὐαγγελιστῶν γραφήν, οἳ καὶ αὐτὰς αὐτοῦ παρατέθεινται τὰς λέξεις, τοτὲ μὲν φήσαντος ὡς πρὸς αὐτὴν τὴν Ἱερουσαλήμ“ εἰ ἔγνως καί γε σὺ ἐν τῇ ἡμέρᾳ ταύτῃ τὰ πρὸς εἰρήνην ἀοῦ·
 νῦν δὲ ἐκρύβη ἀπὸ ὀφθαλμῶν ἀοῦ·
 ὅτι ἥξουσιν ἡμέραι ἐπὶ αἰ, καὶ περιβαλοῦσίν σοι οἱ ἐχθροί σου χάρακα, καὶ περικυκλώσουσίν ἄε, καὶ συνέξουσίν σε πάντοθεν, καὶ ἐδαφιοῦσίν σε καὶ τὰ τέκνα σου,” τοτὲ δὲ περὶ τοῦ λαοῦ“ ἕαται γὰρ ἀνάγκη μεγάλη ἐπὶ τῆς γῆς, καὶ ὀργὴ τῷ λαῷ τούτῳ·
 καὶ πεσοῦνται ἐν στόματι μαχαίρας καὶ αἰχμαλωτισθήσονται εἰς πάντα τὰ ἔθνη·
 καὶ Ἱερουσαλὴμ ἔσται πατουμένη ὑπὸ ἐθνῶν, ἄχρις οὗ πληρωθῶσιν καιροὶof those who were destroyed, says that1.
 100.
 000 perished by famineand tlle sword, and thatthe rest of the rebelsand bandits were pointed out by one another after the capture of the cityand killed.
 The tallest of the youths, and those distinguishedfor physical beauty, were kept fora triumph, and of the remaining population those above seventeen years old Were sent as prisoners to hard labour in Egypt, but more were distributed throughout the provinces to be destroyed in the theatres by the sword and by wild beasts.
 Those below seventeen years old were sold into slavery and these alone were 90.
 000.
 These things happened in this Way in the second year of the reign of Vespasian in accordance with the prophetic utterances of Our Lord and Saviour Jesus Christ, who foreseeing them by divine power as though already present, shed tears at them and mourned according to the writing of the saered evangelist, who appends his actual words.
 For once he saidto Jerusalem herself,“ Ifthou hadst known, even thou, in thisdaythe thing which belong to thy peaee:
 but now they are hid from thine eyes, for the days will come upon thee When thine enemy Shall cart a trench around thee and compass thee round and keep thee in on every side, and shall lay theeandthy children even with the ground.
” at another time, as if concerning the ” For there shall be great distress On the earth and wrath upon this people, and they shall fall by the edge of the sword, and be sold into slavery to all the Gentiles, and Jerusalem shall be trodden down by the Gentiles until the times of the Gentiles ἐθνῶν.
” καὶ πάλιν ὅταν δὲ ἴδητε κυκλουμένην ὑπὸ στρατοπέδων τὴν Ἱερουσαλήμ, τότε γνῶτε ὅτι ἤγγικεν ἡ ἐρήμωσις αὐτῆς.
 ” συγκρίνας δέ τις τὰς τοῦ σωτῆρος ἡμῶν λέξεις ταῖς λοιπαῖς τοῦ συγγραφέως ἱστορίαις ταῖς περὶ τοῦ παντὸς πολέμου, πῶς οὐκ ἂν ἀποθαυμάσειεν, θείαν ὡς ἀληθῶς καὶ ὑπερφυῶς παράδοξον τὴν πρόγνωσιν ὁμοῦ καὶ πρόρρησιν τοῦ σωτῆρος ἡμῶν ὁμολογήσας;
 Περὶ μὲν οὖν τῶν μετὰ τὸ σωτήριον πάθος καὶ τὰς φωνὰς ἐκείνας ἐν αἷς ἡ τῶν Ἰουδαίων πληθὺς τὸν μὲν λῃστὴν καὶ φονέα του θανάτου παρῄτηται, τὸν δ’ ἀρχηγὸν τῆς ζωῆς ἐξ αὐτῶν ἱκέτευσεν ἀρθῆναι, τῷ παντὶ συμβεβηκότων ἔθνει, οὐδὲν ἂν δέοι ταῖς ἱστορίαις ἐπιλέγειν, ταῦταδ’ ἂν εἴη δίκαιον ἐπιθεῖναι, ἃ γένοιτ’ ἄν παραστατικὰ φιλανθρωπίας τῆς παναγάθου προνοίας, τεσσαράκοντα ἐφ’ ὅλοις ἔτεσιν μετὰ τὴν κατὰ τοῦ χριστοῦ τόλμαν τὸν κατ’ αὐτῶν ὄλεθρον ὑπερθεμένης, ἐν ὅσοις τῶν ἀποστόλων καὶ τῶν μαθητῶν πλείους Ἰάκωβός τε αὐτὸς ὁ τῇδε πρῶτος ἐπίσκοπος, τοῦ κυρίου χρηματίζων ἀδελφός, ἔτι τῷ βίῳ περιόντες καὶ ἐπ’ αὐτῆς τῆς Ἱεροσολύμων πόλεως τὰς διατριβὰς ποιούμενοι, ἕρκος ὥσπερ ὀχυρώτατον παρέμενον τῷ τόπῳ, τῆς θείας ἐπισκοπῆς εἰς ἔτι τότε μακροθυμούσης, εἰ ἄρα ποτὲ δυνηθεῖεν ἐφ’ οἷς ἔδρασαν, μετανοήσαντες συγγνώμης καὶ σωτηρίας τυχεῖν, καὶ πρὸς τῆ τοσαύτη μακροθυμίᾳ παραδόξους θεοσημείας τῶν μελλόντων αὐτοῖς μὴ μετανοήσασι συμβήσεσθαι παρασχομένης·
 ἃ καὶ αὐτὰ μνήμης ἠξιωμένα πρὸς τοῦ δεδηλωμένου συγγραφέως οὐδὲν οἷον τοῖς τῇδε προσιοῦσιν τῇ γραφῇ παραθεῖναι.
 be fulfilled.
” And again,“ Αnd when ye Jemsalem surrounded by armies then know that her desolation is at”If anyone comparethe words of our Saviour with the other narratives of the historian concerningthe whole war, how canhe avoid surprise anda confession οf the truly divine and supematurally wonderful character both of the foreknowledge knowledge and of the foretelling οf our Saviour? There isno necessity to add to the narratives of what happened to the whole nation after the passion of the Saviour and those words in which the multitude of the Jews begged off from death the robber and murderer and besought that the author of Life should be taken from them;
 but it would be right to adda possible connnnation οf the kindliness οf beneficent Providence.
 For forty whole years it suspended their dertruction, after their crime against the Christ, and during all of them many ofthe apostles and disciples,and James himself, who is called the Lord's brother,the first bishop of the city, still survivedin this world.
 By their dwellingin Jerusalem, they afforded, as it were,a strong proteetion to the place;
 for the govemment of God had still patience, if haply they might at last by repenting of their deeds, be ableto obtain pardon and salvation;
 and in addition to such great long— suffering it wonderful tokens from God οf what would happento them if they didnot repent.
 These things have been thought worthy of mentionbythehistorian already quoted, and there is nothing better than to append them for the readers of this work.
 VIII.
 καὶ δὴ λαβὼν ἀνάγνωθι τὰ κατὰ τὴν ἕκτην τῶν Ἱστοριῶν αὐτῷ δεδηλωμένα ἐν τούτοις.
 “ Τὸν γοῦν ἄθλιον δῆμον οἱ μὲν ἀπατεῶνες καὶ καταψευδόμενοι του θεοῦ τηνικαῦτα παρέπειθον, τοῖς δ’ ἐναργέσι καὶ προσημαίνουσι τὴν μέλλουσαν ἐρημίαν τέρασιν οὔτε προσεῖχον οὔτ’ ἐπίστευον, ἀλλ’ ὡς ἐμβεβροντημένοι καὶ μήτε ὄμματα μήτε ψυχὴν ἔχοντες τῶν τοῦ θεοῦ κηρυγμάτων παρήκουον, τοῦτο μὲν ὅθ’ ὑπὲρ τὴν πόλιν ἄστρον ἔστη ῥομφαίᾳ παραπλήσιον καὶ παρατείνας ἐπ’ ἐνιαυτὸν κομήτης, τοῦτο δ’ ἡνίκα πρὸ τῆς ἀποστάσεως καὶ τοῦ πρὸς τὸν πόλεμον κινήματος, ἀθροιζομένου τοῦ λαοῦ πρὸς τὴν τῶν ἀζύμων ἑορτήν, ὀγδόη Ξανθικοῦ μηνὸς κατὰ νυκτὸς ἐνάτην ὥραν, τοσοῦτον φῶς περιέλαμψεν τὸν βωμὸν καὶ τὸν ναόν, ὡς δοκεῖν ἡμέραν εἶναι λαμπράν, καὶ τοῦτο παρέτεινεν ἐφ’ ἡμίσειαν ὥραν·
 ὃ τοῖς μὲν ἀπείροις ἀγαθὸν ἐδόκει εἶναι, τοῖς δὲ ἱερογραμματεῦσι πρὸ τῶν ἀποβεβηκότων εὐθέως ἐκρίθη.
 καὶ κατὰ τὴν αὐτὴν ἑορτὴν βοῦς μὲν ἀχθεῖσα ὑπὸ τοῦ ἀρχιερέως πρὸς τὴν θυσίαν ἔτεκεν ἄρνα ἐν τῷ ἱερῷ μέσῳ·
 ἡ δ’ ἀνατολικὴ πύλη τοῦ ἐνδοτέρω χαλκῆ μὲν οὖσα καὶ στιβαρωτάτη, κλειομένη δὲ περὶ δείλην μόλις ὑπ’ ἀνθρώπων εἴκοσι, καὶ μοχλοῖς μὲν ἐπερειδομένη σιδηροδέτοις, κατάπηγαςδ’ ἔχουσα βαθυτάτους, ὤφθη κατὰ νυκτὸς ὥραν ἕκτην αὐτομάτως ἠνοιγμένη.
 μετὰ δὲ τὴν ἑορτὴν ἡμέραις οὐ πολλαῖς ὕστερον, μιᾷ καὶ εἰκάδι Ἀρτεμισίου μηνός, φάσμα τι δαιμόνιον ὤφθη μεῖζον πίστεως, τέρας δ’ ἂν ἔδοξεν εἶναι τὸ ῥηθησόμενον, εἰ μὴ καὶ παρὰ τοῖς θεασαμένοις ἱστόρητο καὶ τὰ VIII.
 Take, then, and read what is related in the sixth book of the Jervish War.
“ Now at that timeimpostorsand lying prophets perverted the miserable people, but they gaVe neither attention nor credence to the clear marvels which foretold approaching desolation, but as though they had been thunderstruck and had neither eyes nor soul, they neglected the declarations of God.
 Αt One timea star stood over the city likea sword, anda comet which lasted fora year.
 Αt another tlme, before the insurrection, and the disturbance which ledto the war, when the people were assembled for the Feastof Unleavened Bread, on theeighthof April, at the ninthhourof the night,a light shoneon the alterandon the templeso brightly thatitseemed to be fullday, and this lasted for half an hour.
 TO the inexperiencedthis seemedagood sign,but was at once interpretedbythe seribes before the events which actually followed.
 Αnd at thc samefeasta cow, which had been led by the— priest forthe sacrifice, gave birth toa lamb inthe middle of the tempIe, And the eastern gate of the inner building, which wasof bronze and very massive and was closed at evening time with difficulty by twenty men, and restedon beams bound with iron and had bars sunk deep, was seen at night at the sixth hour to have opened of itself.
 Αnd after the feast, not many days later, on the twenty— first of May,a demonic phantomof increffible size, and what will be related would have seemeda fairy- tale had it not been told by those who saw it, and been attended by suffering ἐπακολουθήσαντα πάθη τῶν σημείων ἢν ἄξια·
 πρὸ γὰρ ἡλίου δύσεως ὤφθη μετέωρα περὶ πᾶσαν τὴν χώραν ἅρματα καὶ φάλαγγες ἔνοπλοι διᾴττουσαι τῶν νεφῶν καὶ κυκλούμεναι τὰς πόλεις.
 κατὰ δὲ τὴν ἑορτήν, ἢ πεντηκοστὴ καλεῖται, νύκτωρ οἱ ἱερεῖς παρελθόντες εἰς τὸ ἱερόν, ὥσπερ αὐτοῖς ἔθος ἢν, πρὸς τὰς λειτουργίας, πρῶτον μὲν κινήσεως ἔφασαν ἀντιλαμβάνεσθαι καὶ κτύπου, μετὰ δὲ ταῦτα φωνῆς ἀθρόας μεταβαίνομεν ἐντεῦθεν.’
 1 τὸ δὲ τούτων φοβερώτερον, Ἰησοῦς γάρ τις ὄνομα, υἱὸς Ἀνανίου, τῶν ἰδιωτῶν, ἄγροικος, πρὸ τεσσάρων ἐτῶν τοῦ πολέμου, τὰ μάλιστα τῆς πόλεως εἰρηνευομένης καὶ εὐθηνούσης, ἐλθὼν ἐπὶ τὴν ἑορτήν, ἐπεὶ σκηνοποιδῖσθαι πάντας ἔθος ἦν τῷ θεῷ, κατὰ τὸ ἱερὸν ἐξαπίνης ἀναβοᾶν ἤρξατο φωνὴ ἀπ’ ἀνατολῆς, φωνὴ ἀπὸ δύσεως, φωνὴ ἀπὸ τῶν τεσσάρων ἀνέμων, φωνὴ ἐπὶ Ἱεροσόλυμα καὶ τὸν ναόν, φωνὴ ἐπὶ νυμφίους καὶ νύμφας, φωνὴ ἐπὶ πάντα τὸν λαόν.’
 τοῦτο μεθ’ ἡμέραν καὶ νύκτωρ κατὰ πάντας τοὺς στενωποὺς περιῄει κεκραγώς.
 τῶν δ’ ἐπισήμων τινὲς δημοτῶν ἀγανακτήσαντες πρὸς τὸ κακόφημον, συλλαμβάνουσι τὸν ἄνθρωπον καὶ πολλαῖς αἰκίζονται πληγαῖς·
 ὃ δ’ οὔθ’ ὑπὲρ ἑαυτοῦ φθεγξάμενος οὔτε ἰδίᾳ πρὸς τοὺς παρόντας, ἃς καὶ πρότερον φωνὰς βοῶν διετέλει.
 νομίσαντες δ’ οἱ ἄρχοντες, ὅπερ ἢν, δαιμονιώτερον εἷναι τὸ κίνημα τἀνδρός, ἀνάγουσιν αὐτὸν ἐπὶ τὸν παρὰ Ῥωμαίοις ἔπαρχον·
 ἔνθα μάστιξιν μέχρις ὀστέων ξαινόμενος οὔθ’ ἱκέτευσεν οὔτ’ ἐδάκρυσεν, ἀλλ’worthy of the portent.
 For before sunset there appeared in the air over the whole country chariots and armed troops coursing through the clouds and surrounding the cities.
 Αnd at the feast called Pentecost the priests passed into the temple at night, aswas their custom,for their services, and said that they first perceived movement and noise and after thatasudden cry,‘ We go hence’ But whatwas terriblea man of the peoplenamed Jesus, the son οf Ananias, a countryman, four years before the war, when the city was in complete peaee and prosperity, came to the feast when it was the custom for all to make booths for God, and began suddenly to cry οut opposite the temple,‘Α voicefromthe east,a voice from the west,a voice fromthe four winds,a voice against Jerusalemandthe temple,a voice against bridegrooms and brides,a voice againstall the people.’
 With this cry night and day he through all the narrow streets.
 But some οf the notables οf the people were annoyed at the ill omen, seized the man and abused him with many stripes.
 But he uttered no word in his own behalf, nor in private to those present, but went οn with the same cry as before.
 But the rulers thought that the man's action was inspiredbysome demon, as it indeed was, and brought him to the Roman govemor 1;
 there, though he was flayed to the bone with scourges, he uttered no plea and shed no tear, but taising his ὡς ἐνῆν μάλιστα τὴν φωνὴν ὀλοφυρτικῶς παρεγκλίνων, πρὸς ἑκάστην ἀπεκρίνατο πληγήν αἰ αἰ Ἱεροσολύμοις.
 1'" Ἕτερονδ’ ἔτι τούτου παραδοξότερον ὁ αὐτὸς ἱστορεῖ, χρησμόν τινα φάσκων ἐν ἱεροῖς γράμμασιν εὑρησθαι περιέχοντα ὡς κατὰ τὸν καιρὸν ἀπὸ τῆς χώρας τις αὐτῶν ἄρξει τῆς οἰκουμένης, ὃν αὐτὸς μὲν ἐπὶ Οὐεσπασιανὸν πεπληρῶσθαι ἐξείληφεν·
 ἀλλ’ οὐχ ἁπάσης γε οὗτος ἀλλ’ ἢ μόνης ἦρξεν τῆς ὑπὸ Ῥωμαίους·
 δικαιότερον δ’ ἂν ἐπὶ τὸν χριστὸν ἀναχθείη, πρὸς ὃν εἴρητο ὑπὸ τοῦ πατρὸς“ αἴτησαι παρ’ ἐμοῦ, καὶ δώσω σοι ἔθνη τὴν κληρονομίαν ἀοῦ, καὶ τὴν κατάσχεσίν σου τὰ πέρατα τῆς γῆς,’ οὗ δὴ κατ’ αὐτὸ δὴ ἐκεῖνο τοῦ καιροῦ“ εἰς πᾶσαν τὴν γῆν ἐξῆλθεν ὁ φθόγγος ” τῶν ἱερῶν ἀποστόλων“ καὶ εἰς τὰ πέρατα τῆς οἰκουμένης τὰ ῥήματα αὐτῶν.
” IX.
 Ἐπὶ τούτοις ἅπασιν ἄξιον μηδ’ αὐτὸν voice with all his power, answered to every blow,‘ Woe, woe to Jerusalem. ’
” The same writer hasa still more remarkable account in Which he alleges that an oracle was found in“ sacred seript” to the effect that at that timeonefrom their country should rule the world and he himself considered that this was fulfilled by Vespasian.
 Yet he did not reign overthe whole world, but only such part as was subject to the Romans, and it would be more justly referred to Christ, to whom it was said by the Father,“ Αk of me andΙ will give theethe heathen for thine inheritanceandthe ends οftheearth for thy possession.
” was ofhisholy apostles at that Verytime that“the sound went forth into all tbe earthand their words unto the end of the earth.
” IX.
 In addition toall this, it is rightnotto ignore τὸν Ἰώσηπον, τοσαῦτα τῇ μετὰ χεῖρας συμβεβλημένον ἰατορίᾳ, ὁπόθεν τε καὶ ἀφ’ οἴου γένους ὡρμᾶτο, ἀγνοεῖν.
 δηλοῖ δὲ πάλιν αὐτὸς καὶ τοῦτο, λέγων ὧδε“ Ἰώσηπος Ματθίου παῖς, ἐξ Ἱεροσολύμων ἱερεύς, αὐτός τε Ῥωμαίους πολεμήσας τὰ πρῶτα καὶ τοῖς ὕστερον παρατυχὼν ἐξ ἀνάγκης.’
 ’ μάλιστα δὲ τῶν κατ’ ἐκεῖνο καιροῦ Ἰουδαίων οὐ παρὰ μόνοις τοῖς ὁμοεθνέσιν, ἀλλὰ καὶ παρὰ Ῥωμαίοις γέγονεν ἀνὴρ ἐπιδοξότατος, ὡς αὐτὸν μὲν ἀναθέσει ἀνδριάντος ἐπὶ τῆς Ῥωμαίων τιμηθῆναι πόλεως, τοὺς δὲ σπουδασθέωατας αὐτῷ λόγους βιβλιοθήκης ἀξιωθῆναι.
 οὗτος δὴ πᾶσαν τὴν Ἰουδαϊκὴν ἀρχαιολογίαι ἐν ὅλοις εἴκοσι κατατέθειται συγγράμμασιν, τὴν δ’ ἱστορίαν τοῦ κατ’ αὐτὸν Ῥωμαϊκοῦ πολέμου ἐν ἑπτά, ἃ καὶ οὐ μόνον τῆ Ἑλλήνων, ἀλλὰ καὶ τῆ πατρίῳ φωνῇ παραδοῦναι αὐτὸς ἑαυτῷ μαρτυρεῖ, ἄξιός γε ὢν διὰ τὰ λοιπὰ πιστεύεσθαι·
 καὶ ἕτερα δ’ αὐτοῦ φέρεται σπουδῆς ἄξια δύο, τὰ Περὶ τῆς Ἰουδαίων ἀρχαιότητος, ἐν οἷς καὶ ἀντιρρήσεις πρὸς Ἀπίωνα τὸν γραμματικόν, κατὰ Ἰουδαίων τηνικάδε συντάξαντα λόγον, πεποίηται καὶ πρὸς ἄλλους, οἳ διαβάλλειν καὶ αὐτοὶ τὰ πάτρια τοῦ Ἰουδαίων ἔθνους ἐπειράθησαν.
 τούτων ἐν τῷ προτέρῳ τὸν ἀριθμὸν τῆς λεγομένης παλαιᾶς τῶν ἐνδιαθήκων γραφῶν τίθησι, τίνα τὰ παρ’ Ἑβραίοις ἀναντίρρητα, ὡς ἂν ἐξ ἀρχαίας παραδόσεως αὐτοῖς ῥήμασι διὰ τούτων διδάσκων.
 X.
“ Οὐ μυριάδες οὖν βιβλίων εἰσὶ παρ’ ἡμῖν ἀσυμφώνων καὶ μαχομένων, δύο’ δε μόνα πρὸς τοῖς εἴκοσι βιβλία, τοῦ παντὸς ἔχοντα χρόνου τὴν ἀναγραφήν, τὰ δικαίως θεῖα πεπιστευμέωα.
 the date and Origin οf the Josephus who collected so mueh material in the work just dealt with.
 Ηe himself gives this information and says,“ wasason of Mathhisas,a priest of Jerusalem, and at the beginning he fought againrt the Romans and was forced to take part in the later events.
” was the mostfamous Jew of that time, not only amonghis fellow countrymen but also among the Romans, so that hewas honoured by the erection of a statue in the cityof Rome, and the inclusion of the work composed by him in its library Ηe compiled the whole ancient history of the Jews in twenty volumes,1 and the history of the RomanWar2 in hisowntime in seven;
 he testifies thathecommitted this not onlyto Greek but also tohis native language, and heis for other reasons worthyof credenee.
 Two other books of his, worthy of notice, are extant, entitled Οn the ancientnessof the Jervs, 3 in which he controverts Apion the Scribe, who had composeda treatiseagainstthe Jews, and other who had tried to calumniate the ancertral customs of the Jewish nation.
 Ιn the first of these he gives the number of the canonical scripturesof the–called Old Testament, and showed as follows which are undisputed among the Hebrews as belonging to ancicnt tradition.
 X.
“ We havenomyriads of discordantand contradictory books, but onlytwo and twenty, containing the narrative of all time, which have been justly believed to be divine.
 Οf thee fiveare those of καὶ τούτων πέντε μέν ἐστιν Μωυσέως, ἃ τούς τε νόμους περιέχει καὶ τὴν τῆς ἀνθρωπογονίας παράδοσιν μέχρι τῆς αὐτοῦ τελευτῆς·
 οὗτος ὁ χρόνος ἀπολείπει τρισχιλίων ὀλίγον ἐτῶν·
 ἀπὸ δὲ τῆς Μωυσέως τελευτῆς μέχρι τῆς Ἀρταξέρξου τοῦ μετὰ Ξέρξην Περσῶν βασιλέως οἱ μετὰ Μωυσῆν προφῆται τὰ κατ’ αὐτοὺς πραχθέντα συνέγραψαν ἐν τρισὶν καὶ δέκα βιβλίοις·
 αἱ δὲ λοιπαὶ τέσσαρες ὕμνους εἰς τὸν θεὸν καὶ τοῖς ἀνθρώποις ὑποθήκας τοῦ βίου περιέχουσιν.
 ἀπὸ δὲ Ἀρταξέρξου μέχρι τοῦ καθ’ ἡμᾶς χρόνου γέγραπται μὲν ἕκαστα, πίστεωςδ’ οὐχ ὁμοίας ἠξίωται τοῖς πρὸ αὐτῶν διὰ τὸ μὴ γενέσθαι τὴν τῶν προφητῶν ἀκριβῆ διαδοχήν.
 δῆλον δ’ ἐστὶν ἔργῳ πῶς ἡμεῖς πρόσιμεν τοῖς ἰδίοις γράμμασιν·
 τοσούτου γὰρ αἰῶνος ἤδη παρωχηκότος οὔτε μεταθεῖναι τις οὔτε ἀφελεῖν ἀπ’ αὐτῶν οὔτε μεταθεῖναι τετόλμηκεν, πᾶσι δὲ σύμφυτόν ἐστιν εὐθὺς ἐκ πρώτης γενέσεως Ἰουδαίοις τὸ νομίξειν αὐτὰ θεοῦ δόγματα καὶ τούτοις ἐπιμένειν καὶ ὑπὲρ αὐτῶν, εἰ δέοι, θνῄσκειν ἡδέως.
” καὶ ταῦτα δὲ τοῦ συγγραφέως χρησίμως ὧδε παρατεθείσθω.
 πεπόνηται δὲ καὶ ἄλλο οὐκ ἀγεννὲς σπούδασμα τῷ ἀνδρί, Περὶ αὐτοκράτορος λογισμοῦ, ὅ τινες Μακκαβαϊκὸν ἐπέγραψαν τῷ τοὺς ἀγῶνας τῶν ἐν τοῖς οὕτω καλουμένοις Μακκαβαϊκοῖς συγγράμμαοιν ὑπὲρ τῆς εἰς τὸ θεῖον εὐσεβείας ἀνδρισαμένων Ἑβραίων περιέχειν, καὶ πρὸς τῷ τέλει δὲ τῆς εἰκοστῆς Ἀρχαιολογίας ἐπισημαίνεται ὁ αὐτὸς ὡς ἀν’ προῃρημένος τέτταρσιν αυγγράψαι βιβλίοις κατὰ τὰς πατρίους δόξας τῶν Ἰουδαίων περὶ θεοῦ καὶ τῆς οὐσίας Moses and contain the Law and the tradition of human history until his deatll.
 This period covers almost three thousand years.
 From the death of Moses to Artaxerxeswho succeeded Xerxes, king ofthe Persians,the prophets after Moses wrote the aecount of the events contemporary with them in thirteen books.
 1 The remaining four books contain hymns to God and precepts for the life of men.
 From the time of Artaxerxes to our own the detailshave been written, 2 but are not considered worthy οf equal credence with the rest because there has not been an aceurate succession of prophetS.
 Αnd facts show plainly how we approachourown literature,for though so long a time has elapsed no one has daredto make additions, omissions,or changes,but it is innatein Jews from their very birth to regard themas the decreeS of God, to abide in them and, if it need be, to die for them ” This quotation from the author may be usefully appended.
 Another work which is not without merit was produced by him on TheSupremacyof Reason, which some entitled Maccabees3 because it contains the conflicts of those Hebrews mentioned in the so- called booksof the Maccabees, who strove valiantly for the worship of God.
 Αt the end of the twentieth book οf the Antiquities the same writer announces that he had planned to compose four books on the aneestral belief of the Jews concerning God and his nature and αὐτοῦ καὶ περὶ τῶν νόμων, διὰ τί κατ’ αὐτοὺς τὰ μὲν ἔξεστι πράττειν, τὰ δὲ κεκώλυται, καὶ ἄλλα δὲ αὐτῶ σπουδασθῆναι ὁ αὐτὸς ἐν τοῖς ὢ ἰδίοις αὐτοῦ μνημονεύει λόγοις.
 πρὸς τούτοις εὔλογον καταλέξαι καὶ ἃς ἐπ’ αὐτοῦ τῆς Αρχαιολογίας τοῦ τέλους φωνὰς παρατέθειται, εἰς πίστωσιν τῆς τῶν ἐξ αὐτοῦ παραληφθέντων ἡμῖν μαρτυρίας.
 διαβάλλων δῆτα Ἰοῦστον Τιβεριέα, ὁμοίως αὐτῷ τὰ κατὰ τοὺς αὐτοὺς ἱστορῆσαι χρόνους πεπειραμένον, ὡς μὴ τἀληθῆ συγγεγραφότα, πολλάς τε ὤας εὐθύνας ἐπαγαγὼν τῷ ἀνδρί, ταῦτα αὐτοῖς ῥήμασιν ἐπιλέγει“ οὐ μὴν ἐγώ ἀοῖ τὸν αὐτὸν τρόπον περὶ τῆς ἐμαυτοῦ γραφῆς ἔδεισα, ἀλλ' αὐτοῖς ἐπέδωκα τοῖς τὰ βιβλία, μόνον οὐ τῶν ἔργων ἤδη βλεπομένων·
 συνῄδειν γὰρ ἐμαυτῷ τετηρηκότι τὴν τῆς ἀληθείας παράδοσιν, ἐφ’ ᾖ μαρτυρίας τεύξεσθαι προσδοκήσας οὐ διήμαρτον.
 καὶ ἄλλοις δὲ πολλοῖς ἐπέδωκα τὴν ἱστορίαν, ὧν ἔνιοι καὶ παρατετεύχεσαν τῷ πολέμῳ, καθάπερ βασιλεὺς Ἀγρίππας καί τινες αὐτοῦ τῶν συγγενῶν.
 ὁ μὲν γὰρ αὐτοκράτωρ Τίτος οὕτως ἐκ μόνων αὐτῶν ἐβουλήθη τὴν γνῶσιν τοῖς ἀνθρώποις παραδοῦναι τῶν πράξεων, ὥστε χαράξας τῆ αὐτοῦ χειρὶ τὰ βιβλία δαιῶσαι προσέταξεν, ὁ δὲ βασιλεὺς Ἀγρίππας δβ ἔγραψεν ἐπιστολάς, τῆ τῆς ἀληθείας παραδόσει μαρτυρῶν.
” Ἀφ’ ὧν καὶ δύο παρατίθησιν.
 ἀλλὰ τὰ μὲν κατὰ τοῦτον ταύτῃ πη δεδηλώσθω.
 ΧΙ.
 Ἴωμεν δ’ ἐπὶ τὰ ἑξῆς.
 μετὰ τὴν.
 Ἰακώβου μαρτυρίαν καὶ τὴν αὐτίκα γενομένην ἅλωσιν τῆς Ἱερουσαλὴμ λόγος κατέχει τῶν ἀποστόλων καὶ τῶν τοῦ κυρίου μαθητῶν τοὺς εἰς ἔτι τῷ βίῳ λειπομένουςconcerningthe Laws,why they allow some aetions and forbid others.
 Ηe also mentions in his οwn treatises that he had produced other works.
 Moreover, it is right to mention the words which he appends to the end οf the Antiquities to confirm our quotation οf the passages taken from him.
 Accusing of false statements Justus of Tiberias, who had undertaken to writea similar accountofthe same period, and bringing many οther charges against him, he continuesas follows:
 “I had no such fear as you with regard to my own writing, butI gave the bookstothe Emperors themselves while the events were still almost before their eyes.
 ForI was consciousofhaving kept the traditionofthe truth andI did not fail in my expectation of obtaining their testimony to that effect.
I also gave the narrative to many others, of whom some had actually taken partinthe war, such as King Agrippa and some of his relations.
 For the Emperor Titus Was pleased that from these book alone should information be given the public as to theevents, and, writing withhis own hand, he orderedthe books tobe published, and King Agrippa wrote sixty- two letters testifying that they were handing on the” of these letters he appends two, but let this suffice οn the subject of Josephus and let us proceed.
 XI.
 Αfter the martyrdom of James and the capture of Jemsalem whichimmeffidlately followed, the story goes that those οf the Apostles and of the disciples οf the Lord who were still alive came together from ἐπὶ ταὐτὸν πανταχόθεν συνελθεῖν ἅμα τοῖς πρὸς γένους κατὰ σάρκα τοῦ κυρίου πλείους γὰρ καὶ τούτων περιῆσαν εἰς ἔτι τότε τῷ βίῳ), βουλήν τε ὁμοῦ τοὺς πάντας περὶ τοῦ τίνα χρὴ τῆς Ἰακώβου διαδοχῆς ἐπικρῖναι ἄξιον, ποιήσασθαι, καὶ δὴ ἀπὸ μιᾶς γνώμης τοὺς πάντας Συμεῶνα τὸν τοῦ Κλωπᾶ, οὗ καὶ ἡ τοῦ εὐαγγελίου μνημονεύει γραφή, τοῦ τῆς αὐτόθι παροικίας θρόνου ἄξιον εἶναι δοκιμάσαι, ἀνεψιόν, ὥς γέ φασι, γεγονότα τοῦ σωτῆρος, τὸν γὰρ οὗν Κλωπᾶν ἀδελφὸν τοῦ Ἰωσὴφ ὑπάρχειν Ἡγήσιππος ἱστορεῖ, XII.
 καὶ ἐπὶ τούτοις Οὐεσπασιανον μετὰ τὴν τῶν Ἱεροσολύμων ἅλωσιν πάντας τοὺς ἀπὸ γένους Δαυίδ, ὡς μὴ περιλειφθείη τις παρὰ Ἰουδαίοις τῶν ἀπὸ τῆς βασιλικῆς φυλῆς, ἀναζητεῖσθαι προστάξαι, μέγιστόν τε Ἰουδαίοις αὖθις ἐκ ταύτης διωγμὸν ἐπαρτηθῆναι τῆς αἰτίας.
 ΧΙΙΙ.
 Ἐπὶ δέκα δὲ τὸν Οὐεσπασιανὸν ἔτεσιν βασιλεύσαντα αὐτοκράτωρ Τίτος ὁ παῖς διαδέχεται·
 οὗ κατὰ δεύτερον ἔτος τῆς βασιλείας Λίνος ἐπίσκοπος τῆς Ῥωμαίων ἐκκλησίας δυοκαίδεκα τὴν λειτουργίαν ἐνιαυτοῖς κατασχών, Ἀνεγκλήτῳ ταύτην παραδίδωσιν.
 Τίτον δὲ Δομετιανὸς ἀδελφὸς διαδέχεται, δύο ἐτεαὶ καὶ μησὶ τοῖς ἴσοις βασιλεύσαντα.
 XIV.
 τετάρτῳ μὲν οὖν ἔτει Δομετιανοῦ τῆς κατ’ Ἀλεξάνδρειαν παροικίας ὁ πρῶτος Ἀννιανὸς δύο πρὸς τοῖς εἴκοσι ἀποπΛήσας ἔτη, τελευτᾷ, διαδέχεταιδ’ αὐτὸν δεύτερος Ἀβίλιος.
 XV.
 δωδεκάτῳ δὲ ἔτει τῆς αὐτῆς ἡγεμονίας τῆς Ῥωμαίων ἐκκλησίας Ἀνέγκλητον ἔτεσιν ἐπισκοπεύσαντα δεκαδύο διαδέχεται Κλήμης, ὃν συνεργὸν ἑαυτοῦ γενέσθαι Φιλιππησίοις Phil.
 4, 3 ἐπιστέλλων ὁ ἀπόστολος διδάσκει, λέγων“ μετὰ every place with those who were, humanly speaking, οf the familyοfthe Lord,for many of them were then still alive, and they all took counsel together as to whom they οught to adjudge worthy to succeed James, and all unanimously decided that Simeon the son οf Clopas, whom the scripture οf the Gospel also mentions, was worthy of the throne of the diocese there.
 He was, so itis said,a cousin οfthe Saviour, for Hegesippus relates that Clopas was the brother of Joseph,( XII.
) and inaddition that Vespasian, after thecaptureof Jerusalem, ordered a seareh to be madeforall who wereofthefamilyof David, that there might be left among the Jews no one of the royal family and, for this reason,a very great persecution was again infficted οn the Jews.
 XIII.
 when Vespasian had reigned forten years,his son Titus succeeded him as emperor, 1 and in the second year of his reign, Linus, bishop οf the church οf the Romans, after holdinghis officefor twelve years, handed it οn to Anencletus.
 Αfter Titus had reigned for two years and as many months Domitian, his brother, suceeeded him.
 2 XIV.
 Νow in the fourth yearof Domitian, Annianus,the hrst of the see of Alexandria, died after completing twenty- two years, and Abilius succeeded him as the second.
 XV.
 Αnd in the twelfth year of the same reign, Clement sueeeeded Anencletus after he had been bishop of the churchofthe Romans for twelve years.
 The apostle states that he had been his– worker in his epistle tothe Philippians saying,“ With Clementand καὶ Κλήμεντος καὶ τῶν λοιπῶν συνεργῶν μου, ὧν τὰ ὀνόματα ἐν βίβλῳ ζωῆς.
” XVI.
 Τούτου δὴ οὖν ὁμολογουμένη μία ἐπιστολὴ φέρεται, μεγάλη τε καὶ θαυμασία, ἢν ὡς ἀπὸ τῆς ῾Ρωμαίων ἐκκλησίας τῇ Κορινθίων διετυπώσατο, στάσεως τηνικάδε κατὰ τὴν Κόρινθον γενομένης.
 ταύτην δὲ καὶ ἐν πλείσταις ἐκκλησίαις ἐπὶ τοῦ κοινοῦ δεδημοσιευμένην πάλαι τε καὶ καθ’ ἡμᾶς αὐτοὺς ἔγνωμεν.
 καὶ ὅτι γε κατὰ τὸν δηλούμενον τὰ τῆς Κορινθίων κεκίνητο στάσεως, ἀξιόχρεως μάρτυς ὁ Ἡγήσιππος.
 XVII.
 Πόλλην γε μὴν εἰς πολλοὺς ἐπιδειξάμενος ὁ Δομετιανὸς ὠμότητα οὐκ ὀλίγον τε τῶν ἐπὶ ῾Ρώμης εὐπατριδῶν τε καὶ ἐπισήμων ἀνδρῶν πλῆθος οὐ μετ’ εὐλόγου κρίσεως κτείνας μυρίους τε ἄλλους ἐπιφανεῖς ἄνδρας ταῖς ὑπὲρ τὴν ἐνορίαν ζημιώσας φυγαῖς καὶ ταῖς τῶν οὐσιῶν ἀποβολαῖς ἀναιτίως, τελευτῶν τῆς Νέρωνος θεοεχθρίας τε καὶ θεομαχίας διάδοχον ἑαυτὸν κατεστήσατο.
 δεύτερος δῆτα τὸν καθ’ ἡμῶν ἀνεκίνει διωγμόν, καίπερ τοῦ πατρὸς αὐτῷ Οὐεσπασιανοῦ μηδὲν καθ’ ἡμῶν ἄτοπον ἐπινοήσαντος.
 XVIII.
 Ἐν τούτῳ κατέχει λόγος τὸν ἀπόστολον ἅμα καὶ εὐαγγελιστὴν Ἰωάννην ἔτι τῷ βίῳ ἐνδιατρίβοντα, τῆς εἰς τὸν θεῖον λόγον ἕνεκεν μαρτυρίας Πάτμον οἰκεῖν καταδικασθῆναι τὴν νῆσον.
 γράφων γέ τοι ὁ Εἰρήναιος περὶ τῆς ψήφου τῆς κατὰ τὸν ἀντίχριστον προσηγορίας φερομένης ἐν τῇ Ἰωάννου λεγομένῃ Ἀποκαλύψει, αὐταῖς συλλαβαῖς ἐν πέμπτῳ τῶν πρὸς τὰς αἱρέσεις ταῦτα περὶ τοῦ Ἰωάννου φησίν“ εἰ δὲ ἔδει ἀναφανδὸν ἐν τῷ νῦν καιρῷ κηρύττεσθαι τοὔνομα αὐτοῦ, δι’ ἐκείνου ἂν ἐρρέθη my other fellow- workers whose names are in book οf Life.
” XVI.
 There is one recognized epistle of Clement, Ιong and wonderful, Which he drew up for the churchof the Corinthiansin the nameof the churchof the Romans when there had been dissension in Corinth.
 We have ascertained that this letterwas pubhely readin the common assembly in many churches both in the days of old and in our own time;
 and that the affairs οf Corinth were disturbed by dissension in his dayis adequately testffiedtoby Hegesippus.
 XVII.
 When Domitian had given many proofs of his great cruelty and had putto death without any reasonable trial no small number of men distinguished at Rome by familyand career,and had punished without a cause myriads of other notable men by banishment and confiscation of their property, he finally showed himself the successor of Nero's campaign of hostility to God.
 Ηe was thesecond to promotepersecution against uS, though his father, Vespasian, had planned no evil against us.
 XVIII.
 Αt this time, the story goes, the Apostleand Evangelist Johnwas still alive, and was condemned to live in the island of Patmos for his witness to the divine word.
 Αt any rate Irenaeus, Writing about the number of the name ascribed to the anti- Christ the so- called Apocalypse of John, states this about John in so many words in the fifth book against Heresies.
“ But ifithad been neceSSarytoannounce his name plainly at the present time, it would have τοῦ καὶ τὴν ἀποκάλυψιν ἑορακότος.
 οὐδὲ γὰρ πρὸ πολλοῦ χρόνου ἑωράθη, ἀλλὰ σχεδὸν ἐπὶ τῆς ἡμετέρας γενεᾶς, πρὸς τῷ τέλει τῆς Δομετιανοῦ ἀρχῆς.’
 Εἰς τοσοῦτον δὲ ἄρα κατὰ τοὺς δηλουμένους ἡ τῆς ἡμετέρας πίστεως διέλαμπεν διδασκαλία, ὡς καἰ τοὺς ἄποθεν τοῦ καθ’ ἡμᾶς λόγου συγγραφεῖς μὴ ἀποκνῆσαι ταῖς αὐτῶν ἱστορίαις τόν τε διωγμὸν καὶ τὰ ἐν αὐτῷ μαρτύρια παραδοῦναι, οἵ γε καὶ τὸν καιρὸν ἐπ’ ἀκριβὲς ἐπεσημήναντο, ἐν ἔτει πεντεκαιδεκάτῳ Δομετιανοῦ μετὰ πλείστων ἑτέρων καὶ Φλαυίαν Δομέτιλλαν ἱστορήσαντες, ἐξ ἀδελφῆς γεγονυῖαν Φλαυίου Κλήμεντος, ἑνὸς τῶν τηνικάδε ἐπὶ Ῥώμης ὑπάτων, τῆς εἰς χριστὸν μαρτυρίας ἕνεκεν εἰς νῆσον Ποντίαν κατὰ τιμωρίαν δεδόσθαι.
 XIX.
 Τοῦ δ’ αὐτοῦ Δομετιανοῦ τοὺς ἀπὸ γένους Δαυὶδ ἀναιρεῖσθαι προστάξαντος, παλαιὸς κατέχει λόγος τῶν αἱρετικῶν τινας κατηγορῆσαι τῶν ἀπογόνων Ἰούδα( τοῦτον δ’ εἷναι ἀδελφὸν κατὰ σάρκα τοῦ σωτῆρος) ὡς ἀπὸ γένους τυγχανόντων Δαυὶδ καὶ ὡς αὐτοῦ συγγένειαν τοῦ Χριστοῦ φερόντων.
 ταῦτα δὲ δηλοῖ κατὰ λέξιν ὧδέ πως λέγων ὁ Ἡγήσιππος.
 XX.
 “ ἔτι δὲ περιῆσαν οἱ ἀπὸ γένους τοῦ κυρίου υἱωνοὶ Ἰούδα τοῦ κατὰ σάρκα λεγομένου αὐτοῦ ἀδελφοῦ·
 οὓς ἐδηλατόρευσαν 1 ὡς ἐκ γόους ὄντας Δαυίδ.
 τούτους ὁ ἠουοκᾶτος ἤγαγεν πρὸς Δομετιανὸν Καίσαρα.
 ἐφοβεῖτο γὰρ τὴν πάρου·
 αἶαν τοῦ χριστοῦ ὡς καὶ Ἡρῴδης.
 καὶ ἐπηρώτησεν αὐτοὺς εἰ ἐκ Δαυίδ εἰσιν, καὶ ὡμολόγησαν.
 τότε ἠρώτησεν αὐτοὺς πόσας κτήσεις ἔχουσιν ἢ been spoken by him who saw the apocablypse.
 For it was not seen long ago but almost in our own time, at theend of the reign of Domitian.
” The teachingof our faithshone so brilliantlyinthe days described that even writers foreign to our belief did not hesitate to commit to their narratives the persecutions and the martyrdoms in it, and they even indicated the time accurately, relating thatin the fifeenth year1 of Domitian, Flavia Domitilla, who was the niece of Flavius Clemens, one ofthe consuls at Rome at that time, was banished with many others to the island of Pontia as testimony to Christ.
 ΧΙΧ.
 The samc Domitian gave orders for the execution of those of the family of David and an ancient story goes that some hererics accused the grandsons of Judas( who is saidto have been the brother, according to the flesh, of the Saviour) saying that they were of the family of David and related to the Christ himself.
 Hegesippus this exactly as follows.
 XX.
“ Now there still survived of the family of the Lord grandsons of Judas, who was said to have been his brother according to the flesh, and they were delated as being of the familyof David.
 These tlle officer 2 brought to Domitian Caesar, for, like Herod, he was afraid of the coming of the Christ.
 Ηe asked them if they were of the house of David and they admitted it.
 Then he asked them how much property they had, or how πόσων χρημάτων κυριεύουσιν.
 οἱ δὲ εἶπαν ἀμφοτέροις ἐννακισχίλια δηνάρια ὑπάρχειν αὐτοῖς μόνα, ἑκάστῳ αὐτῶν ἀνήκοντος τοῦ ἡμίσεος, καὶ ταῦτα οὐκ ἐν ἀργυρίοις ἔφασκον ἔχειν, ἀλλ’ ἐν διατιμήσει γῆς πλέθρων’λθ’ μόνων, ἐξ ὧν καὶ τοὺς φόρους ἀναφέρειν καὶ αὐτοὺς αὐτουργοῦντας διατρέφέφεσθαι.
” 1 εἶτα δὲ καὶ τὰς χεῖρας τὰς ἑαυτῶν ἐπιδεικνύναι, μαρτύριον τῆς αὐτουργίας τὴν τοῦ σώματος σκληρίαν καὶ τοὺς ἀπὸ τῆς συνεχοῦς ἐργασίας ἐναποτυπωθέντας ἐπὶ τῶν ἰδίων χειρῶν τύλους παριστάντας.
 ἐρωτηθέντας δὲ περὶ τοῦ Χριστοῦ καὶ τῆς βασιλείας αὐτοῦ ὁποία τις εἴη καὶ ποῖ καὶ πότε φανησομένη, λόγον δοῦναι ὡς οὐ κοσμικὴ μὲνοὐδ’ ἐπίγειος, ἐπουράνιος δὲ καὶ ἀγγελικὴ τυγχάνοι, ἐπὶ συντελεία τοῦ αἰῶνος γενησομένη ὁπηνίκα ἐλθὼν ἐν δόξῃ κρινεῖ ζῶντας καὶ νέκρους καὶ ἀποδώσει ἑκάστῳ κατὰ τὰ ἐπιτηδεύματα αὐτοῦ·
 ἐφ’ οἷς μηδὲν αὐτῶν κατεγνωκότα τὸν Δομετιανόν, ἀλλὰ καὶ ὡς εὐτελῶν καταφρονήσαντα, ἐλευθέρους μὲν αὐτοὺς ἀνεῖναι, καταπαῦσαι δὲ διὰ προστάγματος τὸν κατὰ τῆς ἐκκλησίας διωγμόν.
 2 τοὺς δὲ ἀπολυθέντας ηγήσασθαι τῶν ἐκκλησιῶν, ὡς ἂν δὴ μάρτυρας ὁμοῦ καὶ ἀπὸ γένους ὄντας τοῦ κυρίου, γενομένης τε εἰρήνης μέχρι Τραϊανοῦ παραμεῖναι αὐτοὺς τῷ βίῳ.
 ταῦτα μὲν ὁ Ἡγήσιππος·
 οὐ μὴν ἀλλὰ καὶ ὁ Τερτυλλιανὸς τοῦ Δομετιανοῦ τοιαύτην πεποίηται μνήμην“ πεπειράκει ποτὲ καὶ Δομετιανὸς ταὐτὸ ποιεῖν ἐκείνῳ, μέρος ὢν τῆς Νέρωνος ὠμότητος.
 ἀλλ’, οἶμαι, ἅτε ἔχων τι συνέσεως, τάχιστα ἐπαύσατο, ἀνακαλεσάμενος καὶ οὓς ἐξηλάκει.
” much money they controlled.
 and they said that all theypossessedwas nine thousand denarii them, the half belonging to each, and they stated that they did not possess this in money but that it wasthe valuation of only thirty- nine plethra of ground on which they paid taxes and lived on it by theirown” They then showedhim their hands, adducing as testimony of their labour the hardness of their bodies, and the tough skin which had been embossed on their hands from their incessant work.
 They were asked concerning the Christ and his kingdom, its nature, origin,and time of appearance, and explained that it was neither of the world nor earthly, butheavenlyand angelic,and it would be at the endof the world, when he would come in glory to judge the living and the dead and to reward every man according to his deeds.
 At this Domitiandid not condemnthem at all,but despised themas simple folk, released them, and decreed an end to the persecution against the church.
 But when they were released they werethe leaders ofthe churches, both for their testimony and for their relation to the Lord, and remained alive in the peace which ensued until Trajan.
 Hegesippus tells this;
 moreover, Tertullian also has made similar mention of Domitian.
“ Domitian also once tried to do the same as he, for he wasa Nero in cruelty, but,Ι helieve, inasmuch as hehad some sense, he stopped at once and recalled those whom he had banished.
” Μετὰ δὲ τὸν Δομετιανὸν πεντεκαίδεκα ἔτεσιν κρατήσαντα Νερούα τὴν ἀρχὴν διαδεξαμένου, καθαιρεθῆναι μὲν τὰς Δομετιανοῦ τιμάς, ἐπανελθεῖνδ’ ἐπὶ τὰ οἰκεῖα μετὰ τοῦ καὶ τὰς οὐσίας ἀπολαβεῖν τοὺς ἀδίκως ἐξεληλαμένους ἡ Ῥωμαίων σύγκλητος βουλὴ ψηφίζεται·
 ἱστοροῦσιν οἱ γραφῆ τὰ κατὰ τοὺς χρόνους παραδόντες.
 τότε δὴ οὖν καὶ τὸν ἀπόστολον Ἰωάννην ἀπὸ τῆς κατὰ τὴν νῆσον φυγῆς τὴν ἐπὶ τῆς Ἐφέσου διατριβὴν ἀπειληφέναι ὁ τῶν παρ’ ἡμῖν ἀρχαίων παραδίδωσι λόγος.
 XXI.
 Μικρῷ δὲ πλέον ἐνιαυτοῦ βασιλεύσαντα Νερούαν διαδέχεται Τραϊανός·
 οὗ δὴ πρῶτον ἔτος ἦν ἐν ᾧ τῆς κατ’ Ἀλεξάνδρειαν παροικίας Ἀβίλιον δέκα πρὸς τρισὶν ἔτεσιν ἡγησάμενον διαδέχεται Κερδῶν·
 τρίτος οὗτος τῶν αὐτόθι μετὰ τὸν πρῶτον ᾿Αννιανὸν προέστη.
 ἐν τούτῳ δὲ Ῥωμαίων εἰς ἔτι Κλήμης ἡγεῖτο, τρίτον καὶ αὐτὸς ἐπέχων τῶν τῇδε μετὰ Παῦλόν τε καὶ Πέτρον ἐπισκοπευσάντων βαθμόν·
 Λίνος δὲ ὁ πρῶτος ἢν καὶ μετ’ αὐτὸν ᾿Ανέγκλητος.
 XXII.
 ἀλλὰ καὶ τῶν ἐπ’ Ἀντιοχείας Εὐοδίου πρώτου καταστάντος δεύτερος ἐν τοῖς δηλουμένοις ᾿Ιγνάτιος ἐγνωρίζετο.
 Συμεὼν ὁμοίως δεύτερος μετὰ τὸν τοῦ σωτῆρος ἡμῶν ἀδελφὸν τῆς ἐν ῾Ιεροσολύμοις ἐκκλησίας κατὰ τούτους τὴν λειτουργίαν εἶχεν.
 ΧΧΙΙΙ.
 Ἐπὶ τούτοις κατὰ τὴν Ἀσίαν ἔτι τῷ βίῳ περιλειπόμενος αὐτὸς ἐκεῖνος ὃν ἠγάπα ὁ Ἰησοῦς,;
 ἀπόστολος ὁμοῦ καὶ εὐαγγελιστὴς Ἰωάννης τὰς αὐτόθι διεῖπεν ἐκκΛησίας, ἀπὸ τῆς κατὰ τὴν νῆσον μετὰ τὴν Δομετιανοῦ τελευτὴν ἐπανελθὼν φυγῆς.
 ὅτι δὲ εἰς τούτους τῷ βίῳ περιῆν, ἀπόχρη διὰ δύο πιστώσασθαι τὸν λόγον μαρτύρων, πιστοὶδ’ ἂν εἶεν οὗτοι, τῆς ἐκκλησιαστικῆς πρεσβεύσαντες ὁρθο- Αfter Domitian had reigned fifteen years, Nerva succeeded.
 1 The sentences οf Domitian were annulled, and the Roman Senate decreed the return οf those whohad been unjustly banished and the restoration of their property.
 Those who committed the story οf those times to writing relate it.
 Αt that time, too, the story of the ancient Christians relates thatthe Apostle John, after his banishment tothe island, took uphis abode at Ephesus.
 XXI.
 After Νerva had reigneda little more thana year he wassuceeededby Trajan,2 in whosefirst year Abilius, after leading the diocese οf Alexandria for thirteen years, was sueceeded by Cerdo;
 he was the thirdin charge οf that see afterthe first, Annianus.
 Αt this time Clement was still governing the Romans andhe, also, occupied the third Ρlace in the listοf bishops in Rome after Ρaul and Ρeter;
 Linus was the first and after him Anencletus.
 XXII.
 Moreover, at the timementioned, Ignatius was famous as the second bishop at Antioch where Evodius had been the first.
 Likewise at this time, Simeon was second after the brother οf our Saviour to hold the ministry of the churchin Jerusalem.
 XXIII.
 Αt this time that very disciple whom Jesus loved, John, at οnceApostleand Evangelist, still remained alive in Asia and administered the churches there, for after thedeathof Domitian,he had returned from his banishment οn the island.
 Αnd that he remained alive until this time may fully be confirmedbytwo witnesses,and these oughtto be trustworthy for they represent the orthodoxy of the δοξίας, εἰ δὴ τοιοῦτοι Εἰρήναιος καὶ Κλήμης ὁ Ἀλεξανδρεύς·
 ὧν ὁ μὲν πρότερος ἐν δευτέρῳ τῶν πρὸς τὰς αἱρέσεις ὧδέ πως γράφει κατὰ λέξιν·
“ καὶ πάντες οἱ πρεσβύτεροι μαρτυροῦσιν οἱ κατὰ τὴν Λαίαν Ἰωάννη τῷ τοῦ κυρίου μαθητῇ συμβεβληκότες παραδεδωκέναι τὸν Ἰωάννην.
 παρέμεινεν γὰρ αὐτοῖς μέχρι τῶν Τραϊανοῦ Χρόνων.
 ” 1 καὶ ἐν τρίτῳ δὲ τῆς αὐτῆς ὑποθέσεως ταὐτὸ τοῦτο δηλοῖ διὰ τούτων·
 “ ἀλλὰ καὶ ἢ ἐν Ἐφέσω ἐκκλησία ὑπὸ Παύλου μὲν τεθεμελιωμένη, Ἰωάννου δὲ παραμείναντος αὐτοῖς μέχρι τῶν Τραϊανοῦ χρόνων, μάρτυς ἀληθής ἐστιν τῆς τῶν ἀποστόλων παραδόσεως.
 ” Ὁ δὲ Κλήμης ὁμοῦ τὸν χρόνον ἑπισημηνάμενος, καὶ ἱστορίαν ἀναγκαιοτάτην οἷς τὰ καλὰ καὶ ἐπωφελῆ φίλον ἀκούειν, προστίθησιν ἐν ᾧ“ ίς ὁ σῳζόμενος πλούσιος’’ ἐπέγραφεν αὐτοῦ συγγράμματι·
 λαβὼν δὲ ἀνάγνωθι ὧδέ πως ἔχουσαν καὶ αὐτοῦ τὴν γραφήν·
 “ “ ἄκουσον μῦθον οὐ μῦθον ἀλλὰ ὄντα λόγον πέρι Ἰωάννου τοῦ ἀποστόλου παραδεδομένον καὶ μνήμη πεφυλαγμένον.
 ἐπειδὴ γὰρ τοῦ τυράννου τελευτήσαντος ἀπὸ τῆς Πάτμου τῆς νήσου μετῆλθεν ἐπὶ τὴν Ἔφεσον, ἀπῄει παρακαλούμενος καὶ ἐπὶ τὰ πλησιόχωρα τῶν ἐθνῶν, ὅπου μὲν ἐπισκόπους καταστήσων, ὅπου δὲ ὅλας ἐκκλησίας ἁρμόαων, ὅπου δὲ κλῆρον ἕνα γέ τινα κληρώσων τῶν ὑπὸ τοῦ πνεύματος σημαινομένων.
 ἐλθὼν οὖν καὶ ἐπί τινα τῶν οὐ μακρὰν πόλεων, 2 ἦς καὶ τοὔνομα λέγουσιν ἔνιοι, καὶ τἄλλα ἀναπαύσας τοὺς ἀδελφούς, ἐπὶ πᾶσι τῷ καθεστῶτι προσβλέψας ἐπισκόπῳ, νεανίσκον ἱκανὸν τῷ σώματι καὶ τὴν ὄφιν ἀστεῖον καὶ θερμὸν τὴν ψυχὴν ἰδών, τοῦτον’ ἔφη σοὶ church, no less persons than Irenaeus and Clement οf Alexandria.
 The former of these writesinοne Ρlace in the second οf his books Against the Hereises,as follows:
“ Αnd allthepresbyters who had been associated in Asia with John, the discipleof the Lord, bear witnessto his tradition, for heremained with them untilthe timesk of” Αnd inthethird book οfthesame work he makesthe same statement as follows:
“ Νοw the church at Εphesus wasfoundedby Ρaul, but Johu stayed there until the times οf Trajan, and it isa true witness of the tradition οf the Apostles.
” Clement indicatesthe same time, and inthe treatise to whichhe gave the titleWho is the richman that is saved, adds a narrative most acceptableto those who enjoy hearing what is fineand edifying.
 Take and read here what he wrote.
“ Listen toa story which is nota story buta true tradition οf John the Apostle Ρreserved in memory.
 For after the death of the tyrant he passed from the island of Ρatmosto Εphesus,and used alsoto go, when hewas asked, to the neighbouring districts of the heathen, 1 in some places to appoint bishops,in others toreconcile whole churches, and in others to ordain some οne of those pointed out by the spirit.
 Ηe came to one οf the cities which were near by( and some tell cvenits name), 2 and gave restin general to the brethren;
 then, while looking before them all at the bishop whohad been appointed, he sawa young man οf strong body, beautiful appearance, and wann heart.
 ῾I commend this᾿ he siad, παρακατατίθεμαι μετὰ πάσης σπουδἠς ἐπὶ τῆς ἐκκλησίας καὶ τοῦ χριστοῦ μάρτυρος.
 τοῦ δὲ δεχομένου καὶ πάνθ᾿ ὑπισχνουμένου, καὶ πάλιν τὰ αὐτὰ διελέγετο καὶ διεμαρτύρετο.
 εἶτα ὁ μὲν ἀπῆρεν ἐπὶ τὴν Ἐφεσον, ὁ δὲ πρεαβύτερος ἀναλαβὼν οἴκαδε τὸν παραδοθέντα νεανίακον ἔτρεφεν, αυνεῖχεν, ἔθαλπεν, τὸ τελευταῖον ἐφώτισεν.
 καὶ μετὰ τοῦτο ὑφῆκεν τῆς πλείονος ἐπιμελείας καὶ παραφυλακῆς, ὡς τὸ τέλειον αὐτῷ φυλακτήριον ἐπιστήσας τὴν σφραγῖδα κυρίου.
 τῷ δὲ ἀνέσεως πρὸ ὥρας λαβομένῳ προσφθείρονταί τινες ἥλικες ἀργοὶ καὶ ἀπερρωγότες, ἐθάδες κακῶν, καὶ πρῶτον μὲν δι’ ἑατιάαεων πολυτελῶν αὐτὸν ἐπάγονται, εἶτά που καὶ νύκτωρ ἐπὶ λωποδυσίαν ἐξιόντες συνεπάγονται, εἶτά τι καὶ μεῖζον συμπράττειν ἠξίουν·
 ὃ δὲ κατ’ ὀλίγον προσειθίζετο, καὶ διὰ μέγεθος φύσεως ἑκάτας δαπερ ἄστομος καὶ εὔρωστος ἵππος ὀρθῆς ὁδοῦ καὶ τὸν χαλινὸν ἐνδακών, μειζόνως κατὰ τῶν βαράθρων ἐφέρετο, ἀπογνοὺς δὲ τελέως τὴν ἐν θεῷ σωτηρίαν, οὐδὲν ἔτι μικρὸν διενοεῖτο, ἀλλὰ μέγα τι πράξας, ἐπειδήπερ ἅπαξ ἀπολώλει, ἴσα τοῖς ἄλλοις παθεῖν ἠξίου.
 αὐτοὺς δὴ τούτους ἀναλαβὼν καὶ λῃστήριον συγκροτήσας, ἕτοιμος λῄαταρχος ἢν, βιαιότατος μιαιφονώτατος χαλεπώτατος.
 χρόνος ἐν μέαῳ, καί τινος ἐπιπεσούσης χρείας ἀνακαλοῦσι τὸν Ἰωάννην.
 ὃ δὲ ἐπεὶ τὰ ἄλλα ὧν χάριν ἧκεν κατεατήαατο, ῾ἄγε δή᾿ ἔφη ῾ὦ ἐπίσκοπε, τὴν παραθήκην ἀπόδος ἡμῖν, ἢν ἐγώ τε καὶ ὁ Χριατός σοι παρακατεθέμεθα ἐπὶ τῆς ἐκκλησίας, ἧς προκαθέζῃ, μάρτυρος.
 ὃ δὲ τὸ μὲν πρῶτον ἐξεπλάγη, χρήματα οἰόμενος, ἅπερ οὐκ ἔλαβεν, συκοφαντεῖαθαι, καὶ οὔτε πιστεύειν εἶχεν ὑπὲρ ὧν οὐκ εἶχεν, to you withall diligence in the faceof the church,and with Christ as my witness.’
 received him, and promised everything, and the same conversations and protestations were used.
 John then returned to Ephesus and the presbyter1 took to his house the young man entrustedto him, brought him up, looked after him, and finally baptized him.
 Αfter this he relaxed his great careand watchfulness, because hehad set upon him the seal of the Lord as the perfect safeguard.
 But some idle and dissolute youths, familiar with evil, corrupted him in his presature freedom.
 First they led him on by expensive feasts, then they started out at night for robbery and took him with them, then they urged him to greater crimes.
 Ηe gradually becameaccustomed to this, and like an unbroken and powerful horse starting from the straight way and tearing at the bit, rushed all the more totheprecipice becaue οf his natural vigour.
 Finally he renounced salvation from God;
 and now he planned nothing small, but, having perpetratedsome great crime, since he was ruised once for all, accepted the same lot as the others.
 Ηe collected them and formeda band of brigandsandwas himselfa born chief, excelling in violence, in murder, and in cruelty.
 Time went on and some necessity arose to summon John.
 When he had arranged the rest of his mission John said,‘ Come now, bishop,pay me back the deposit which Christ andIleft with you,with the church, over whichyou preride, as witness.’
 The bishopwas at first amazed, thinking thathe was being blackmailedfor money whichhe had not received.
 Ηe could neither show his faitjfi;
 mess in οὔτε ἀπιστεῖν Ἰωάννη·
 ὡς δέ τὸν νεανίσκον᾿ εἶπεν ῾ἀπαιτῶ καὶ τὴν ψυχὴν τοῦ ἀδελφοῦ᾿ στενάξας κάτωθεν ὁ πρεαβύτης καί τι καὶ ἐπιδακρύσας, ῾ἐκεῖνος᾿ ἔφη τέθνηκεν.
᾿ πῶς καὶ τίνα θάνατον;
᾿ ῾θεῷ τέθνηκεν᾿ εἷπεν·
 ῾ἀπέβη γὰρ πονηρὸς καὶ ἐξώλης καί, τὸ κεφάλαιον, λῃστής, καὶ νῦν ἀντὶ τῆς ἐκκλησίας τὸ ὄρος κατείληφεν μεθ’ ὁμοίου στρατιωτικοῦ.
᾿ καταρρηξάμενος τὴν ἐαθῆτα ὁ ἀπόστολος καὶ μετὰ μεγάλης πληξάμενος τὴν κεφαλήν, ῾καλόν γε᾿ ἔφη ῾φύλακα τῆς τἀδελφοῦ ψυχῆς κατέλιπον.
 ἀλλ᾿ ἵππος ἤδη μοι παρέατω, καὶ ἡγεμὼν γενέσθω μοί τις τῆς ὁδοῦ.
᾿ ἤλαυνεν, ὥσπερ εἶχεν, αὐτόθεν ἀπὸ τῆς ἐκκλησίας.
 ἐλθὼν δὲ εἰς τὸ χωρίον, ὑπὸ τῆς προφυλακῆς τῶν Λῃστῶν ἁλίσκεται, μήτε φεύγων μήτε παραιτούμενος, ἀλλὰ βοῶν῾ ἐπὶ τοῦτ᾿ ἐλήλυθα, ἐπὶ τὸν ἄρχοντα ὑμῶν ἀγάγετέ με·
 ᾿ ὃς τέως, ὥσπερ ὥπλιατο, ἀνέμενεν, ὡς δὲ ἐγνώρισε τὸν Ἰωάννην, εἰς φυγὴν αἰδεσθεὶς ἐτράπετο.
 ὃ δὲ ἐδίωκεν ἀνὰ κράτος, ἐπιλαθόμενος τῆς ἡλικίας τῆς ἑαυτοῦ, κεκραγώς ῾τί με φεύγεις, τέκνον, τὸν ααυτοῦ πατέρα, τὸν γυμνόν, τὸν γέροντα;
 ἐλέησόν με, τέκνον, μὴ φοβοῦ·
 ἔχεις ἔτι ζωῆς ἐλπίδας.
 ἐγὼ Χριατῷ λόγον δώσω ὑπὲρ σοῦ·
 ἂν δέη, τὸν σὸν θάνατον ἑκὼν ὑπομενῶ, ὡς ὁ κύριος τὸν ὑπὲρ ἡμῶν·
 ὑπὲρ ἀοῦ τὴν ψυχὴν ἀντιδώσω τὴν ἐμήν.
 στῆθι, πίατευαον·
 χριστός με ἀπέατειλεν. ’
 ὃ δὲ ἀκούσας, πρῶτον ἔστη μὲν κάτω βλέπων, εἶτα ἔρριφεν τὰ ὅπλα, εἶτα τρέμων ἔκλαιεν πικρῶς·
 προσελθόντα δὲ τὸν γέροντα περιέλαβεν, ἀπολουούμενος ταῖς οἰμωγαῖς ὡς ἐδύνατο καὶ τοῖς δάκρυσι βαπτιζόμενος ἐκ δευτέρου, μόνην ἀποκρύπτων τὴν what he had never had, nor could he fail John.
 But when John said,‘I ask backthe young man andthesoul οf the brother,’ the οld man deeplyand shedding tears, said,‘ He has died. ’
‘ Ηow and with what death?’‘ Ηe hasdiedto God,’ he said, ‘ for he turned out wicked abandonedand finallya brigand,and now instead of the church he has taken to the mountains with an armed band of men like himself.’
 Then the rent his gannents and beat his head with great lamentation.
‘ Well,’ he said, ‘ it wasa fine guardian whomI left for the soul ofour brother.
 But let me have a horse and some one to show me the way.’
 So he rode, just as he was, straight from the church.
 when he came to the place he was wasby the sentinelof the brigands and neither fled nor made excuses, but ealled out,‘ This iswhyI am come;
 take me to your leader.’
 The leaderwaited for him, armedashe was, but whenhe recognized John οn his approach, he turned and fled in shame.
 But John pursued with all his might, forgetting his ageand calling οut,‘ Why do you run away from me, child, your own father, unarmed and old? Ρity me, child, do not fear me! You have stillhope οf life.
I will aecount to Christ for you.
 Ιf it mustbe,I will willinglysuffer your death, as the Lord suffered for us;
 for your life, I will give my own.
 Stay, believe;
 Christ sent’ when he heard thishe nrst stood looking down, then he tore off his weapons, then he began to tremble and to weep bitterly.
 Ηe embraced the old man whenhe came up, pleading for himself with lamentations as best he could, baptized a second timeinhis tears, but his right δεξιάν·
 ὃ δ ἐγγυώμενος, ἐπομνύμενος ὡς ἄφεαιν αὐτῷ παρὰ τοῦ σωτῆρος ηὕρηται, δεόμενος, γόνυ.
 πετῶν, αὐτὴν τὴν δεξιὰν ὡς ὑπὸ τῆς μετανοίας κεκαθαρμένην καταφιλῶν, ἐπὶ τὴν ἐκκλησίαν ἐπ’.
 ἀνήγαγεν, καὶ δαφιλέαι μὲν εὐχαῖς ἐξαιτούμενος, συνεχέαι δὲ νηστείαις συναγωνιζόμενος, ποικίλαις δὲ σειρῆαι λόγων κατεπᾴδων αὐτοῦ τὴν γνώμην, οὐ πρότερον ἀπῆλθεν, ὥς φασιν, πρὶν αὐτὸν ἐπιατῆσαι τῇ ἐκκλησίᾳ, διδοὺς μέγα παράδειγμα μετανοίας ἀληθινῆς καὶ μέγα γνώριαμα παλιγγενεσίας, τρόπαιον ἀναστάσεως βλεπομένης.
 ” 1 ταῦτα τοῦ Κλήμεντος, ἱστορίας ὁμοῦ καὶ ὠφελείας τῆς τῶν ἐντευξομένων ἕνεκεν, ἐνταῦθά μοι κείσθω.
 XXΙV.
 Φέρε δέ, καὶ τοῦδε τοῦ ἀποατόλου τὰς ἀναντιρρήτους ἐπισημηνώμεθα γραφάς.
 καὶ δὴ τὸ κατ’ αὐτὸν εὐαγγέλιον ταῖς ὑπὸ τὸν οὐρανὸν διεγνωσμένον ἐκκλησίαις, πρῶτον ἀνωμολογήσθω·
 ὅτι γε μὴν εὐλόγως πρὸς τῶν ἀρχαίων ἐν τετάρτη μοίρᾳ τῶν ἄλλων τριῶν κατείλεκται, ταύτῃ ἄν γένοιτο δῆλον.
 οἱ θεσπέαιοι καὶ ὡς ἀληθῶς θεοπρεπεῖς, φημὶ δὲ τοῦ Χριστοῦ τοὺς ἀποστόλους, τὸν βίον ἄκρως κεκαθαρμένοι καὶ ἀρετῇ πάσῃ τὰς φυχὰς κεκοσμημένοι, τὴν δὲ γλῶτταν ἰδιωτεύοντες, τῆ γε μὴν πρὸς τοῦ σωτἠρος αὐτοῖς δεδωρημένῃ θείᾳ καὶ παραδοξοποιῷ δυνάμει θαρσοῦντες, τὸ μὲν ἐν πειθοῖ καὶ τέχνῃ λόγων τὰ τοῦ διδασκάλου μαθήματα πρεσβεύειν οὔτε ᾔδεσαν οὔτε ἐνεχείρουν, τῇ δὲ τοῦ θείου πνεύματος τοῦ συνεργοῦντος αὐτοῖς ἀποδείξει καὶ τῇ δι’ αὐτῶν συντελουμένῃ θαυματουργῷ τοῦ Χριστοῦ δυνάμει μόνη Χρώμενοι, τῆς τῶν οὐρανῶν βασιλείας τὴν γνῶσιν ἐπὶ πᾶσαν hand he kept back.
 But John assured him by pledges and protestations that he had found forgiveness for him withthe Saviour,led him back, prayed and kneeled and kissed that right hand as though cleansed by his repentance.
 Ηe brought himtothe church,he prayed with many supplications, he joined with him in the struggleof continouns fasting, he workedon his mind by varied addresses and did not leave him,so they say, until he had restored himto the church, and thusgavea great exampleof true repentance anda great testimony of regeneration, the trophyofa visible” These remarks of Clement may be quoted both for the Sake of the narrative and the edification of those who shall read them.
 XXIV.
 But come, let us indicate the undoubted writings οf this Apostle.
 1 Let the Gospel according to him be first recognized, for it is read in all the churches under heaven.
 Moreover, that itwasreasonable for the aneientsto reckon it in the fourth place after the other three may be explained thus.
 Those inspired and venerable ancients,I mean Christ's Apostles, had completely purified their life and adorned their souls with every virtue, yet were but simple men in speech.
 Though they were indeed bold in the divine and wonder- working power given themby the saviour, they had neither the knowledge or the desire to represent the teachings of the Master in persuasive or artiStic language, but they used only the proof of the spirit of God which worked with them, and the wonder- working power of Christ which was consummated through them.
 Thus they announced the knowledge οf the Kingdomof Ηeaven κατήγγελλον τὴν οἰκουμένην, απουδῆς τῆς περὶ τὸ λογογραφεῖν μικρὰν ποιούμενοι φροντίδα.
 καὶ τοῦτ’ ἔπραττον ἅτε μείζονι καὶ ὑπὲρ ἄνθρωπον ἐξυπηρετούμενοι διακονίᾳ.
 ὁ γοῦν Παῦλος πάν·
 ἐν παρασκευῇ λόγων δυνατώτατος νοήμασίν τε ἱκανώτατος γεγονώς, οὐ πλέον τῶν βραχυτάτων ἐπιστολῶν γραφῆ παραδέδωκεν, καίτοι μυρία γε καὶ ἀπόρρητα λέγειν ἔχων, ἅτε τῶν μέχρις οὐρανοῦ τρίτου θεωρημάτων ἐπιφαύσας ἐπ’ αὐτόν τε τὸν θεοπρεπῆ παράδεισον ἀναρπασθεὶς καὶ τῶν ἐκεῖσε ῥημάτων ἀρρήτων ἀξιωθεὶς ἐπακοῦσαι.
 οὐκ ἄπειροι μὲν οὖν ὑπῆρχον τῶν αὐτῶν καὶ οἱ λοιποὶ τοῦ σωτῆρος ἡμῶν φοιτηταί, δώδεκα μὲν ἀπόστολοι, ἑβδομήκοντα δὲ μαθηταί, ἄλλοι τε ἐπὶ τούτοις μυρίοι·
 ὅμως δ’ οὖν ἐξ ἁπάντων τῶν τοῦ κυρίου διατριβῶν ὑπομνήματα Ματθαῖος ἡμῖν καὶ νῆς μόνοι καταλελοίπασιν·
 οὕς καὶ ἐπάναγκες ἐπὶ τὴν γραφὴν ἐλθεῖν κατέχει λόγος.
 Ματθαῖός τε γὰρ πρότερον Ἑβραίοις κηρύξας, ὡς ἤμελλεν καὶ ἐφ’ ἑτέρους ἰέναι, πατρίῳ γλώττη γραφῆ παραδοὺς τὸ κατ’ αὐτὸν εὐαγγέλιον, τὸ λεῖπον τῆ αὐτοῦ παρουσίᾳ τούτοις ἀφ’ ὧν ἐστέλλετο, διὰ τῆς γραφῆς ἀπεπλήρου·
 ῥοῦ·
 ἤδη δὲ Μάρκου καὶ Λουκᾶ τῶν κατ’ αὐτοὺς εὐαγγελίων τὴν ἔκδοσιν πεποιημένων, Ἰωάννην φασὶ τὸν πάντα χρόνον ἀγράφῳ κεχρημένον κηρύγματι, τέλος καὶ ἐπὶ τὴν γραφὴν ἐλθεῖν τοιᾶσδε χάριν αἰτίας.
 τῶν προαναγραφέντων τριῶν εἰς πάντας ἤδη καὶ εἰς αὐτὸν διαδεδομένων, ἀποδέξασθαι μέν φασιν, ἀλήθειαν αὐτοῖς ἐπιμαρτυρήσαντα, μόνην δὲ ἄρα λείπεσθαι τῇ γραφῇ τὴν περὶ τῶν ἐν πρώτοις καὶ κατ’ ἀρχὴν τοῦ κηρύγματος ὑπὸ τοῦ χριστοῦ πεπραγμένων διήγηαιν.
 καὶ ἀληθής γε ὁ λόγος.
 to all the worldand cared but little for attention to their style.
 Αnd this they did inasmuch as they were servinga greater, superhuman ministry.
 Thus Ρaul, the most powerful of all in the preparationof argument andthe Strongest thinker, committedto writing no morethanshort epistles, though hehad ten thousand ineffable thngs to say, seeing thathe had touched the vision ofthe third heaven, had been caught up to the divine paradise itself, and was there granted the hearing ineffable words.
 Νor were the other pupils of our Saviour without experience of the same things,— the twelve Apostles andthe seventy disciples and ten thousand others in addition to them.
 Yet nevertheless of all those who had been with the Lord only Matthewand John have left theirrecollections, and tradition says that they took to writing perforce.
 Matthew had first preached to Hebrews, and whenhe was onthepoint of goingto others he transmittedin writing in his nativelanguagethe Gospelaccordingto himself, and thus supplied by writhing the Ιack of his own presence to those from whom he was sent, and Mark and Luke had already published the Gospels according to them, but John,it is said, used all the timea message which was not written down, and at last took to writing for the following cause.
 The three gospels which had been written down before were distributed to all including himself;
 it is said that he welcomed them and testified to their truth but said that there was only lacking to the narrative the account of what waS doneby Christ at first and at the beginningofthe preaehing.
 The story is τοὺς τρεῖς γοῦν εὐαγγελιστὰς συνιδεῖν πάρεστιν μόνα τὰ μετὰ τὴν ἐν τῷ δεσμωτηρίῳ Ἰωάννου τοῦ βαπτιστοῦ κάθειρξιν ἐφ’ ἕνα ἐνιαυτὸν πεπραγμένα τῷ σωτῆρι συγγεγραφότας αὐτό τε τοῦτ’ ἐπισημηωαμένους κατ’ ἀρχὰς τῆς αὐτῶν ἱστορίας·
 μετὰ γοῦν τὴν τεασαρακονταήμερον νηστείαν καὶ τὸν ἐπὶ ταύτῃ πειρασμὸν τὸν χρόνον τῆς ἰδίας γραφῆς ὁ μὲν Ματθαῖος δηλοῖ λέγων“ ἀκούσας δὲ ὅτι παρεδόθη, ἀνεχώρησεν’’ ἀπὸ τῆς Ἰουδαίας“ εἰς τὴν Γαλιλαίαν, ” ὁ δὲ Μάρκος ὡσαύτως“ μετὰ δὲ τὸ παραδοθῆναι’’ φησίν“ Ἰωάννην ἦλθεν Ἰησοῦς εἰς τὴν Γαλιλαίαν,’ ’ καὶ ὁ Λουκᾶς δὲ πρὶν ἄρξασθαι τῶν τοῦ Ἰησοῦ πράξεων, παραπλησίως ἐπιτηρεῖ, φάακων ὡς ἄρα προσθεὶς Ἡρῴδης οἷς διεπράξατο πονηροῖς,“ κατέκλεισε τὸν Ἰωάννην ἐν φυλακῇ.
 ” παρακληθέντα δὴ οὖν τούτων ἕνεκά φασι τὸν ἀπόστολον Ἰωάννην τὸν ὑπὸ τῶν προτέρων εὐαγγελιστῶν παρασιωπηθέντα χρόνον καὶ τὰ κατὰ τοῦ πεπραγμένα τῷ σωτῆρι ταῦταδ’ ἢν τὰ πρὸ τῆς τοῦ βαπτιστοῦ καθείρξεως) τῷ κατ’ αὐτὸν εὐαγγελίῳ παραδοῦναι, αὐτό τε τοῦτ’ ἐπισημήνασθαι, μήνασθαι, τοτὲ μὲν φήσαντα“ ταύτην ἀρχὴν ἐποίησεν τῶν παραδόξων ὁ Ἰηαοῦς,’’ τοτὲ δὲ μνημονεύσαντα τοῦ βαπτιστοῦ μεταξὺ τῶν’ Iηαοῦ πράξεων ὡς ἔτι τότε βαπτίζοντος ἐν ἰνὼν ἐγγὺς τοῦ Σαλείμ, σαφῶς τε τοῦτο δηλοῦν ἐν τῷ λέγειν“ οὔπω γὰρ ἦν Ἰωάννης βεβλημένος εἰς φυλακήν,’ ’ οὐκοῦν ὁ μὲν Ἰωάννης τῆ τοῦ κατ’ αὐτὸν εὐαγγελίου γραφῆ τὰ μηδέπω τοῦ βαπτιστοῦ εἰς φυλακὴν βεβλημένου πρὸς τοῦ χριστοῦ πραχθέντα παρα- δίδωσιν, οἱ δὲ λοιποὶ τρεῖς εὐαγγελισταὶ τὰ μετὰ τὴν εἰς τὸ δεσμωτήριον κάθειρξιν τοῦ βαπτιστοῦ surely true.
 It is at least possible to see that the three evanglists related only what the Saviour did during one year after John the Baptist had been put in prison and that they stated this at the beginning or their nauative.
 Αt any rate, after the forty’ fast,and the temptation which followed Matthew fixes the time described in his own writing by saying that“ hearing that John had been betrayed, he retreated’’ from Judaea“ into”Similarly Mark says,“ and after John was betrayed Jesus came into” Αnd Luke, too, makes a similar observation before beginning the acts οf Jcsus saying that Ηerod added to the evil deeds which he had done by “ shutting up John in ” ney say accordingly that for this reason the apostle John was asked to relate in his own gospel the period Ρassed over in silence by the former evangelists and the things done during it by the Saviour( that is to say, the events before the imprisonment of the Baptist), and that he indicated this at one timeby saying,“ this beginning οf miracles did” at anotherby mentioning the Baptists in the the of the acts of Jesus as at that time still baptizing at Aenon near salem, and that he makes this plain by saying,“ for John was not yet cast into prison.
” Thus John in the course of his gospel relates what Christ did before the Baptist had been thrown into prison, but the other three evangelists narrate the events after the imprisonment of the Baptist.
 If μνημονεύουσιν·
 οἷς καὶ ἐπιστήσαντι οὐκέτ’ ἂν δόξαι διαφωνεῖν ἀλλήλοις τὰ εὐαγγέλια τῷ τὸ μὲν κατὰ Ἰωάννην τὰ πρῶτα τῶν τοῦ χριστοῦ πράξεων περιέχειν, τὰ δὲ λοιπὰ τὴν ἐπὶ τέλει τοῦ χρόνου αὐτῷ γεγενημένην ἱστορίαν·
 εἰκότως δ’ οὖν τὴν μὲν τῆς σαρκὸς τοῦ σωτῆρος ἡμῶν γενεαλογίαν ἅτε Ματθαίῳ καὶ Λουκᾷ προγραφεῖσαν ἀποσιωπῆσαι τὸν Ἰωάννην, τῆς δὲ θεολογίας ἀπάρξασθαι ὡς ἂν αὐτῷ πρὸς τοῦ θείου πνεύματος οἷα κρείττονι παραπεφυλαγμένης.
 Tαῦτα μὲν οὗν ἡμῖν περὶ τῆς τοῦ κατὰ Ἰωάννην εὐαγγελίου γραφῆς εἰρήσθω, καὶ τῆς κατὰ Μάρκον δὲ ἡ γενομένη αἰτία ἐν τοῖς πρόσθεν ἡμῖν δεδήλωται·
 ὁ δὲ Λουκᾶς ἀρχόμενος καὶ αὐτὸς τοῦ κατ’ αὐτὸν συγγράμματος τὴν αἰτίαν προύθηκεν δι’ ἢν πεποίηται τὴν αύνταξιν, δηλῶν ὡς ἄρα πολλῶν καὶ ἄλλων προπετέστερον ἐπιτετηδευκότων διήγηαιν ποιήσασθαι ὧν αὐτὸς πεπληροφόρητο λόγων, ἀναγκαίως ἀπαλλάττων ἡμᾶς τῆς περὶ τοὺς ἄλλους ἀμφηρίστου ὑπολήψεως, τὸν ἀσφαλῆ λόγον ὧν αὐτὸς ἱκανῶς τὴν ἀλήθειαν κατειλήφει ἐκ τῆς ἅμα Παύλῳ συνουσίας τε καὶ διατριβῆς καὶ τῆς τῶν λοιπῶν ἀποστόλων ὁμιλίας ὠφελημένος, διὰ τοῦ ἰδίου παρέδωκεν εὐαγγελίου.
 καὶ ταῦτα μὲν ἡμεῖς περὶ τούτων·
 οἰκειότερον δὲ κατὰ καιρὸν διὰ τῆς τῶν ἀρχαίων πειρασόμεθα τὰ καὶ τοῖς ἄλλοις περὶ αὐτῶν εἰρημένα πειρασόμεθα δηλῶσαι.
 Τῶν δὲ Ἰωάννου γραμμάτων πρὸς τῷ εὐαγγελίῳ καὶ ἢ προτέρα τῶν ἐπιστολῶν παρά τε τοῖς νῦν καὶ τοῖς ἔτ’ ἀρχαίοις ἀναμφίλεκτος ὡμολόγηται, ἀντιλέγονται δὲ αἱ λοιπαὶ δύο, τῆς δ’ Ἀποκαλύφεως εἰς thisbe understood the gospelsno longer appearto disagree, becauswe that according to John contains the first of the acts οf Christ and the others the narrative of what he did at the end of the poriod, and it will seem probable that John passed over the genealogy οf our Saviour according to the flesh, because it had been already written out by Matthew and Luke, and began with the description of his divinity since this had been reserved for him by the Divine Spirit as for one greater than they.
 The above must suffice us concerning the writing of the Gospel accordingto John,and the cause for that according to Μark has been explained above.
 Luke himself at the beginning of his treatise prefixed an account οf the cause for which he hadmade his compilation, explaining that while many others had somewhat rashly attempted to make a narrative of the thingsοf which hehadhimself full knowledge, 1 he felt obliged to releaseusfrom the doubtful propositionsof the othersand related inhisown gospel the accurate account of the things οf which he had shimself firmly learnt the truth from his profitable intercourse and life with Ρaul and his conversation with the other apostles.
 This must suffice us for the present, but at the proper time we will endeavour to explain by citation from the ancients what has been said on the point by others.
 Of the writingsof John in addition to the gospel the first of his epistles has been accepted without controversy by ancients and moderns alike but the οther two are disputed, and as to the Revelation there ἑκάτερον ἔτι νῦν παρὰ τοῖς πολλοῖς περιέλκεται ἡ δόξα·
 ὁμοίως γε μὴν ἐκ τῆς τῶν ἀρχαίων μαρτυρίας ἐν οἰκείῳ καιρῷ τὴν ἐπίκρισιν δέξεται καὶ ἀυτὴ.
 XXV.
 Εὕλογον δ’ ἐνταῦθα γενομένους ἀνακεφαλαιώσασθαι τὰς δηλωθείσας τῆς καινῆς διαθήκης γραφάς.
 καὶ δὴ τακτέον ἐν πρώτοις τὴν ἁγίαν τῶν εὐαγγελίων τετρακτύν, οἷς ἕπεται ἢ τῶν Πραξέων τῶν ἀποστόλων γραφή·
 μετὰ δὲ ταύτην τὰς Παύλου καταλεκτέον ἐπιστολάς, αἷς ἑξῆς τὴν φερομένην Ἰωάννου προτέραν καὶ ὁμοίως τὴν Πέτρου κυρωτέον ἐπιστοΛήν·
 ἐπὶ τούτοις τακτέον, εἴ γε φανείη, τὴν Ἀποκάλυψιν Ἰωάννου, περὶ ἦς τὰ δόξαντα κατὰ καιρὸν ἐκθησόμεθα.
 καὶ ταῦτα μὲν ἐν ὁμολόγου- μένοις·
 τῶν δ’ ἀντιλεγομένων, γνωρίμων δ’ οὖν ὅμως τοῖς πολλοῖς, ἡ λεγομένη Ἰακώβου φέρεται καὶ ἡ Ἰούδα ἢ τε Πέτρου δευτέρα ἐπιστολὴ καὶ ἡ ὀνομαζομένη δευτέρα καὶ τρίτη Ἰωάννου, εἴτε τοῦ εὐαγγελιστοῦ τυγχάνουσαι εἴτε καὶ ἑτέρου ὁμωνύμου ἐκείνῳ.
 ἐν τοῖς νόθοις κατατετάχθω καὶ τῶν Παύλου Πραξέων ἡ γραφὴ ὅ τε λεγόμενος Ποιμὴν καὶ ἡ Ἀποκάαλυψις Πέτρου καὶ πρὸς τούτοις ἢ φερομένη Βαρνάβα ἐπιστολὴ καὶ τῶν ἀποατόλων αἱ λεγόμεναι Διδαχαὶ ἔτι τε, ὡς ἔφην, ἡ Ἰωάννου ἀποκάλυψις, εἰ φανείη·
 ἢν τινες, ὡς ἔφην, ἀθετοῦσιν, ἕτεροι δὲ ἐγκρίνουσιν τοῖς ὁμολογουμένοις.
 ἤδη δ’ ἐν τούτοις τινὲς καὶ τὸ καθ’ Ἑβραίους εὐαγγέλιον κατέλεξαν, ᾧ μάλιστα Ἑβραίων οἱ τὸν χριστὸν παραδεξάμενοι χαίρουσιν.
 ταῦτα δὲ πάντα τῶν ἀντιλεγομένων ἂν εἴη, ἀναγκαίως δὲ καὶ τούτων ὅμως τὸν κατάλογον πεποιήμεθα, διακρίνοντες τάς τε κατὰ τὴν ἐκκλησιαστικὴν παράδοσιν have been many advocates of either opinion up to the present.
 This, too, shall be similarly illustrated by quotations from the ancients at the proper time.
 XXV.
 Αt this point it seems reasonable to summarize the writings of the Νew Testament which have been quoted.
 Ιn the first place should be put the holy tetrad of the Gospels.
 To them follows the writing οf the Αcts ofthe Apostles.
 Αfter this should be reckoned the Epsitlesof Ρaul.
 Following them the Epistle of John called the first, and in the same way should be recognized the Epistle of Ρeter.
 In addition to these should be put, if it Seem desirable, the Revelationof John, the arguments concerning which we will expound at the proper time.
 These belong to the Recognized Books.
 Of the Disputed Books which are nevertheless known to most are the Epistle called of James, that of Jude, the second Epistle of Ρeter, and the so- called second and third Εpistles of John which may be the work οf the evangelist or of some other with the same name.
 Among the books which are not genuine must be reckoned the Actsof Ρaul, the work entitled the Shepherd, the Apocalypseor Ρeter, and in addition to them the letter called of Barnabas and the so- called Teachings of the Apostles.
 Αnd in addition, asI said, the Revelationof John, if this view prevaial.
 For, as I said, some reject it, but otherscount it among the Recognized Books.
 Some have also counted the Gospel according to the Hebrews in which those of the Hebrews who have aceepted Christ takea special pleasure.
 These would all belong to the disputed books, but we have nevertheleSs been obliged to makea list of them, distinguishing betweenthose writings which, according tothe tradition of ἀληθεῖς καὶ ἀπλάστους καὶ ἀνωμολογημένας γραφὰς καὶ τὰς ἄλλως παρὰ ταύτας, οὐκ ἐνδιαθήκους μὲν ἀλλὰ καὶ ἀντιλεγομένας, ὅμως δὲ παρὰ πλείστοις τῶν·
 ἐκκλησιαστικῶν γινωσκομένας, ὕν’ εἰδέναι ἔχοιμεν αὐτάς τε ταύτας καὶ τὰς ὀνόματι τῶν ἀποστόλων πρὸς τῶν αἱρετικῶν προφερομένας ἤτοι ὡς Πέτρου καὶ Θωμᾶ καὶ Ματθία ἢ καί τινων παρὰ τούτους ἄλλων εὐαγγέλια περιεχούσας ἢ ὡς Ἀνδρέου καὶ Ἰωάννου καὶ τῶν ἄλλων ἀποστόλων πράξεις·
 ὧν οὐδὲν οὐδαμῶς ἐν συγγράμματι τῶν κατὰ τὰς διαδοχὰς ἐκκλησιαστικῶν τις ἀνὴρ εἰς μνήμην ἀγαγεῖν ἠξίωσεν, πόρρω δέ που καὶ ὁ τῆς φράσεως παρὰ τὸ ἦθος τὸ ἀποστολικὸν ἐναλλάττει χαρακτήρ, ἢ τε γνώμη καὶ ἡ τῶν ἐν αὐτοῖς φερομένων προαίρεσις πλεῖστον ὅσον τῆς ἀληθοῦς ὀρθοδοξίας ἀπᾴδουσα, ὅτι δὴ αἱρετικῶν ἀνδρῶν ἀναπλάσματα τυγχάνει, σαφῶς παρίστησιν·
 ὅθεν οὐδ’ ἐν νόθοις αὐτὰ κατατακτέον, ἀλλ’ ὡς ἄτοπα πάντῃ καὶ δθσσεβῆ παραιτητέον.
 XXVI.
 Ἴωμεν δὴ λοιπὸν καὶ ἐπὶ τὴν ἑξῆς ἱστορίαν.
 Σίμωνα τὸν μάγον Μένανδρος διαδεξάμενος, μένος, ὅπλον δεύτερον οὐ χεῖρον τοῦ προτέρου τῆς διαβολικῆς ἐνεργείας ἀποδείκνυται τὸν τρόπον.
 ἦν καὶ οὗτος Σαμαρεύς, εἰς ἄκρον δὲ γοητείας οὐκ ἔλαττον τοῦ διδασκάλου προελθών, μείζοσιν ἐπιδαψιλεεύεται τερατολογίαις, ἑαυτὸν μὲν ὡς ἄρα εἴη, λέγων, ὁ σωτὴρ ἐπὶ τῇ τῶν ἀνθρώπων ἄνωθέν ποθεν ἐξ ἀοράτων αἰώνων ἀπεσταλμένος σωτηρίᾳ, διδάσκων δὲ μὴ ἄλλως δύνασθαί τινα καὶ αὐτῶν τῶν κοσμοποιῶν ἀγγέλων περιυενήσεσθαι, μὴ πρότερον διὰ τῆς πρὸς αὐτοῦ παραδιδομένης μαγικῆς ἐμπειρίας ἀχθέντα καὶ διὰ τοῦ μεταδιδομένου πρὸς αὐτοῦ the Church, are true, genuine, and recognized, and those which differ from them in that they are not canonical but disputed, yet neverthelss are known to most of the writers οf the Chureh, in order that we might know them and the writings which put forward by heretics under the name of the apostles containing gospels such as those οf Ρeter, and Thomas, and Matthias, and some others besides, or Acts such as those of Andrew and John and the other apostles.
 To none of these has any who belonged to the succession of the orthodox ever thought it right to refer in his writings.
 Moreover the type of phraseology differs from apostolic style, and the opinion and tendeney of their contents is widely dissonant from true orthodoxy and clearly shows that they are the forgeries οf heretics.
 They ought, therefore,to be reckoned not even among spurious books but shunned as altogether wicked and impious.
 XXVI.
 Let us now continue the narrative.
 Menander succeeded Simon Magus and showed himself asa weapon of the devil's power not inferior to his predecessor.
 He, too,wasa Samaritan, progressed to the highest point οf sorcery not less than his master, and abounded in greater wonders.
 Ηe said of himself that he was the saviour who had been sent from above for the salvation of men from invisible aeons1 and taught that noone, not even οf the angels who made the world, could survive unless they were first rescued through the magic art which was transmitted by him and through the bapiam βαπτίσματος, οὗ τοὺς καταξιουμένους ἀθανασίαν ἀΐδιον ἐν αὐτῷ τούτῳ μεθέξειν τῷ βίῳ, μηκέτι θνήσκοντας, αὐτοῦ δὲ παραμένοντας εἰς τὸ ἀεὶ ἀγήρως τινὰς καὶ ἀθανάτους ἐσομένους.
 ταῦτα μὲν οὗν καὶ ἐκ τῶν Εἰρηναίου διαγνῶναι ῥᾴδιον·
 καὶ ὁ Ἱουδυῖνος δὲ κατὰ τὸ αὐτὸ τοῦ Σίμωνος μνημονεύσας, καὶ τὴν περὶ τούτου διήγησιν ἐπιφέρει, λέγων·
 “ Μένανδρον δέ τινα καὶ αὐτὸν Σαμαρέα, τὸν ἀπὸ κώμης Κσπστσυυσίσς, γενόμενον μαθητὴν τοῦ Σίμωνος, οἰστρηθέντα καὶ αὐτὸν ὑπὸ τῶν δαιμόνων καὶ ἐν Ἀντιοχείᾳ γενόμενον, πολλοὺς ἐξαπατῆσαι διὰ μαγικῆς τέχνης οἴδαμεν·
 ὃς καὶ τοὺς αὐτῷ ἑπομένους ὡς μὴ ἀποθνῄσκοιεν, ἔπεισεν, καὶ νῦν τινές εἰσιν, ἀπ’ ἐκείνου τοῦτο ὁμολογοῦντες.
” Ἦν δ’ ἄρα διαβολικῆς ἐνεργείας διὰ τοιῶνδε γοήτων τὴν Χριστιανῶν προσηγορίαν ὑποδυομένων τὸ μέγα τῆς θεοσεβείας μυστήριον ἐπὶ μαγεία σπουδάσαι διαβαλεῖν διασῦραί τε δι’ αὐτῶν τὰ περὶ Ψυχῆς ἀθανασίας καὶ νεκρῶν ἀναστάσεως ἐκκλησιαστικὰ δόγματα.
 ἀλλ’ οὗτοι μὲν τούτους σωτῆρας ἐπιγραψάμενοι τῆς ἀληθοῦς ἀποπεπτώκασιν ἐλπίδος·
 ΧΧVII.
 ἄλλους δ’ ὁ πονηρὸς δαίμων, τῆς περὶ τόν ριστὰν τοῦ θεοῦ διαθέσεως ἀδυνατῶν ἐκσεῖσαι, θατεραλήπτους εὑρὼν ἐσφετερίζετο.
·
 Ἐβιωναίους τούτους οἰκείως ἐπεφήμιζον οἱ πρῶτοι, πτωχῶς καὶ ταπεινῶς τὰ περὶ τοῦ χριστοῦ δοξάζοντας.
 λιτὸν μὲν γὰρ αὐτὸν καὶ κοινὸν ἡγοῦντο, κατὰ προκοπὴν ἤθους αὐτὸ μόνον ἄνθρωπον δεδικαιωμένον ἐξ ἀνδρός τε κοινωνίας καὶ τῆς Μάριας γεγεννημένον·
 δεῖν δὲ πάντως αὐτοῖς τῆς νομικῆς θρῃσκείας ὡς μὴ ἂν διὰ μόνης τῆς εἰς τὸν Χριστὸν πίστεως καὶ τοῦ κατ’ αὐτὴν βίου σωθησομένοις.
 ἄλλοι δὲ παρὰ τού-which he delivered, for those who were vouchsafed it would obtaina share of eternal immortality in this life itself, no longer mortal but remaining here, destined to everlasting and ageless immortality.
 This point can also be easily studied from the writingsof Irenaeus.
 Justin, too, in the same way after mentioning Simon continues his account of him by saying,“ We also know thatacertian Menander,who abo wasa samaritan from the village of Caparat taea, became a disciple of Simonand being similarly srimulated by the demons appeared in Antioch and deceived many by magical arts.
 He persuaded those who followed him that they would not die, and there are still some of his followers who believe this.
” It was assuredly at the instigationof the devil that the name οf Christianwas adopted by such sorcerers to calumniate by magic the great mystery of religion and through them to destroy the teaching of the Chureh on the immortality οf the soul and the resurrection of the dead.
 Those who termed these Saviours fell from the true hope.
 XXVII.
 But others the wiched demon, when he could not aliienate them from God 's plan in Christ,made his own, when he found them bya different snare.
 The first Christians gave these the suitablename of Ebionites because they had poor and mean opinions concerning Christ.
 They held him to beaplain and ordinarymanwho had achieved righteousness merely by the progress of his characcter and had been born naturally from Mary and her busband.
 They insisted on the complete observation of the Law, and did not think that they would be saved by faith in Christ alone and by a life in accordance with it.
 But there were others besides these τοὺς τῆς αὐτῆς ὄντες προσηγορίας, τὴν μὲν τῶν εἰρημένων ἔκτοπον διεδίδρασκον ἀτοπίαν, ἐκ παρθένου ἁγίου πνεύματος μὴ ἀρνούμενοι γεγονέναι τὸν κύριον, οὐ μὴν ἔθ’ ὁμοίως καὶ οὗτοι προυπάρχειν αὐτὸν θεὸν λόγον ὄντα καὶ σοφίαν ὁμολογοῦντες, τῇ τῶν προτέρων περιετρέποντο δυσσεβείᾳ, μάλιστα ὅτε καὶ τὴν σωματικὴν περὶ τὸν νόμον λατρείαν ὁμοίως ἐκείνοις περιέπειν ἐσπούδαζον.
 οὗτοι δὲ τοῦ μὲν ἀποστόλου πάμπαν τὰς ἐπιστολὰς ἀρνητέας ἠγοῦντο εἶναι δεῖν, ἀποστάτην ἀποκαλοῦντες αὐτὸν τοῦ νόμου, εὐαγγελίῳ δὲ μόνῳ τῷ καθ’ Ἑβραίους λεγομένῳ χρώμενοι, τῶν λοιπῶν σμικρὸν ἐποιοῦντο λόγον·
 καὶ τὸ μὲν σάββατον καὶ τὴν ἄλλην Ἰουδαϊκὴν ἀγωγὴν ὁμοίως ἐκείνοις παρεφύλαττον, ταῖς δ’ αὖ κυριακαῖς ἡμέραις ἡμῖν τὰ παραπλήσια εἰς μνήμην τῆς σωτηρίου ἀναστάσεως ἐπετέλουν·
 ὅθεν παρὰ τὴν τοιαύτην ἐγχείρησιν τῆς τοιᾶσδε λελόγχασι προσηγορίας, τοῦ Ἐβιωναίων ὀνόματος τὴν τῆς διανοίας πτωχείαν αὐτῶν ὑποφαίνοντος·
 ταύτῃ γὰρ ἐπίκλην ὁ πτωχὸς παρ’ Ἑβραίοις ὀνομάζεται.
 ΧΧVIII.
 κατὰ τοὺς δηλουμένους χρόνους ἐτέρας αἱρέσεως ἀρχηγὸν γενέσθαι Κήρινθον παρειλήφαμεν·
 Γάϊος, οὗ φωνὰς ἤδη πρότερον παρατέθειμαι, ἐν τῇ φερομένη αὐτοῦ ζητήσει ταῦτα περὶ αὐτοῦ γράφει·
“ Ἀλλὰ καὶ Κήρινθος ὁ δι’ ἀποκαλύψεων ὡς ὑπὸ ἀποστόλου μεγάλου γεγραμμένων τερατολογίας ἡμῖν ὡς δι’ ἀγγέλων αὐτῷ δεδειγμένας ψευδόμενος ἐπεισάγει, λέγων μετὰ τὴν ἀνάστασιν ἐπίγειον εἶναι τὸ βασίλειον τοῦ Χριστοῦ καὶ πάλιν ἐπι- who have the same name.
 These escaped the absurd folly of the first mentioned, and did not deny that the Lordwasborn ofaVirginandthe Ηoly Spirit, but nevertheless agreed with them in not confessing his pre- existence as God, being the Logos and Wisdom.
 Thus they shared in the impiety ofthe former class, especially in that they were equally zealous to insist on the literal observance of the Law.
 They thought that the letters ofthe Apostle 1 ought to be wholly rejecgted and called him an apostate from the Law.
 They used only the Gospel called according to the Hebrews and made little account of the rest.
 Like the former they used to observe the sabbath and the rest of the Jewish ceremonial, but onSundays celebrated rites like ours in commemorationofthe Saviour's resurrection.
 wherefore from these practices they have obtained their name, for the name οf Ebionites indicates the poverty of their intelligence, for this name meanS “ poor’’ in Hebrew.
 2 XXVIII.
 We have received the tradrtion that at the time under discussion Cerinthus founded another heresy.
 Gaius, whose words1 have quoted before, in the inquiry attributedto him writes as follows about Cerinthus.
“ Moreover, Cerinthus,who through revelations attributedto the writing ofa great apostle, lyingly introduees portents to us as though shown him by angels, and says that after the resurrection the kingdom of Christ will be on earth and that θυμίαις καὶ ἡδοναῖς ἐν Ἱερουσαλὴμ τὴν πολιτευομένην δουλεύειν.
 καὶ ἐχθρὸς ὑπάρχων ταῖς γραφαῖς τοῦ θεοῦ, ἀριθμὸν χιλιονταετίας ἐν γάμῳ ἑορτῆς, θέλων πλανᾶν, λέγει γίνεσθαι.
” Καὶ Διονύσιος δέ, ὁ τῆς κατὰ Ἀλεξάνδρειαν παροικίας καθ’ ἡμᾶς τὴν ἐπιακοπὴν εἰληχώς, ἐν δευτέρῳ τῶν Ἐπαγγελιῶν περὶ τῆς Ἰωάννου Ἀποκαλύψεως εἰπών τινα ὡς ἐκ τῆς ἀνέκαθεν παραδόσεως, τοῦ αὐτοῦ μέμνηται ἀνδρὸς τούτοις τοῖς ῥήμασιν·
 Κήρινθον δέ, τὸν καὶ τὴν ἀπ’ ἐκείνου κλῆθεν ααν Κηρινθιανὴν αἵρεσιν συστησάμενον, ἐπιφημίσαι θελήσαντα τῷ ἑαυτοῦ πλάσματι ὄνομα.
 τοῦτο γὰρ εἶναι τῆς διδασκαλίας αὐτοῦ τὸ δόγμα, ἐπίγειον ἔαεαθαι τὴν τοῦ Χριστοῦ βασιλείαν, καὶ ὧν αὐτὸς ὠρέγετο, φιλοσώματος ὢν καὶ πάνυ σαρκικός, ἐν τούτοις ὀνειροπολεῖν ἔσεσθαι, γαστρὰς καὶ τῶν ὑπὸ γαστέρα πλησμοωαῖς, τοῦτ’ τοῦὶ αἰτίοις καὶ πότοις καὶ γάμοις καὶ δι’ ὧν εὐφημότερον ταῦτα ᾠήθη ποριεῖσθαι, ἑορταῖς καὶ θυσίαις καὶ ἱερείων αφαγαῖς.
 ” Ταῦτα Δυσίαις ὁ δὲ Εἰρήναιος ἀπορρητοτέρασ δή τινας τοῦ αὐτοῦ ψευδοδοξίας ἐν πρώτῳ συγγράμματι τῶν πρὸς τὰς αἱρέσεις προθείς, ἐν τῷ τρίτῳ καὶ ἱστορίαν οὐκ ἀξίαν λήθης τῆ γραφῇ παραδέδωκεν, ὡς ἐκ παραδόσεως Πολυκάρπου φάσκων Ἰωάννην τὸν ἀπόστολον εἰσελθεῖν ποτε ἐν βαλανείῳ, ὥστε λούσασθαι, γνόντα δὲ ἔνδον ὄντα τὸν Κήρινθον, ἀποπηδῆσαί τε τοῦ τόπου καὶ ἐκφυγεῖν θύραζε, μηδ’ ὑπομείναντα τὴν αὐτὴν αὐτῷ ὑποδῦναι στέγην, ταὐτὸ δὲ τοῦτο καὶ τοῖς σὺν αὐτῷ παραινέσαι, φήσαντα “ φύγωμεν μὴ humanity living in Jerusalem will again be the slave of lust and pleasure.
 Ηe is the enemyοfthe scriptures of God andinhis desire to deceive says that the marriage feast1 will lasta thousand.
 years.
 ” Dionysius, too, who held the bishopric of the diocese of Alexandriain οur time, in the second bookofhis Promises makes some remarks about the Apocalypse οf John as though from ancient οn and refers to the same Cerintus in these words,“ Cerintus too, who founded the Cerinthian heresy named after him, wished to attaeha name worthy of credit to his οwn invention, for the doctrineofhis teaching was this, that the kingdom οf Christ wouldbe οn earth, and being fond of his bodyandvery camal he dreamtofa future accordingtohis own desires, given up the the indulgenceof the flesh, that is, eating anddrinkingand marrying,and to those things which seem a euphemismfor these things, feasts and sacrifices and the slaughter of victums.
” Dionysius said this and Irenaeus in his first book Agianst Heresies quoted some οf his more abominable errors, and in the third book has committed to writinga narrative, which deserves not to be forgotten, stating how aecorffing to the traffidltionof Polycarp, the apostle John once went intoa bath- house to wash, but when he knew that Cerinthuswaswithin leapt outofthe place andRedfrom the door, for he did not endure to be even under the same roof with him, and enjoined οn those who were with him to do the same, saying,“ Let us flee, lest the bath- house καὶ τὸ βαλανεῖον συμπέσῃ, ἔνδον ὄντος Κηρίνθου τοῦ τῆς ἀληθείας ἐχθροῦ.
” ΧΧIX.
 Ἐπὶ τούτων δῆτα καὶ ἡ λεγομένη τῶν ικολαϊτῶν αἵρεσις ἐπὶ σμικρότατον συνέστη χρόνον, ἦς δὴ καὶ ἡ τοῦ Ἰωάννου ἀποκάλυψις μνημονεύει·
 οὗτοι Νικόλαον ἕνα τῶν ἀμφὶ τὸν Στέφανον διακόνων πρὸς τῶν ἀποστόλων ἐπὶ τῇ τῶν ἐνδεῶν θεραπείᾳ προκεχειρισμένων ηὔχουν.
 ὅ γε μὴν Ἀλεξανδρεὺς Κλήμης ἐν τρίτῳ Στρωματεῖ ταῦτα περὶ αὐτοῦ κατὰ λέξιν ἱστορεῖ·
“ Ὠραίαν, φασί, γυναῖκα ἔχων οὗτος, μετὰ τὴν ἀνάληψιν τὴν τοῦ σωτῆρος πρὸς τῶν ἀποστόλων ὀνειδισθεὶς ζηλοτυπίαν, εἰς μέσον ἀγαγὼν τὴν γυναῖκα γῆμαι τῷ βουλομένῳ ἐπέτρεφεν.
 ἀκόλουθον γὰρ εἶναί φασι τὴν πρᾶξιν ταύτην ἐκείνη τῇ φωνῇ τῆ ὅτι παραχρᾶσθαι τῇ σαρκὶ δεῖ, καὶ δὴ κατακολουθήσαντες τῷ γεγενημένῳ τῷ τε εἰρημένῳ ἁπλῶς καὶ ἀβασανίστως, ἀνέδην ἐκπορνεύουσιν οἱ τὴν αἵρεσιν αὐτοῦ μετιόντες.
 πυνθάνομαι δ’ ἐγὼ τὸν Νικόλαον μηδεμιᾷ ἑτέρᾳ παρ’ ἢν ἔγημε κεχρῆσθαι γυναικί, τῶν τε ἐκείνου τέκνων τὰς μὲν θηλείας καταγηρᾶσαι παρθένους, ἄφθορον δὲ διαμεῖναι τὸν υἱόν·
 ὧν οὕτως ἐχόντων ἀποβολὴ πάθους ἢν ἡ εἰς μέαον τῶν ἀποστόλων τῆς ζηλοτυπουμένης ἐκκύκλησις γυναικός, καὶ ἡ ἐγκράτεια τῶν περισπουδάστων ἡδονῶν τὸ‘ παραχρᾶσθαι τῆ σαρκὶ’ ἐδίδασκεν.
 οὐ γάρ, οἶμαι, ἐβούλετο κατὰ τὴν τοῦ σωτῆρος ἐντολὴν δυσὶ κυρίοις δουλεύειν’ ἡδονῇ καὶ κυρίῳ.
 λέγουσι ἴ’δ’ οὖν καὶ τὸν Ματθίαν οὕτω διδάξαι, σαρκὶ μὲν μάχεσθαι καὶ παραχρᾶσθαι μηδὲν αὐτῇ πρός ἡδονὴν ἐνδιδόντα, ψυχὴν δὲ αὔξειν διὰ πίστεως καὶ fall in, for Cerinthus, the enemy of the truth, is within.
” XXIX.
 Αt this time, too,there existed fora short time the heresyof the Nicolaïtans of which the of John also makes mention.
 These elaimed Nicolas, one of the deacons in the company of Stephen who were appointed by the Apostles for the serviee of the poor.
 Clement or Αlexandria in the third book of the Stromata givesthe following accountof him.
“ Ηe had, they say,a beautiful wife;
 but after the ascension of the saviour he was accused of jealousy by the apostles, and brought her forward and commanded her to be mated to anyone who wished.
 They say that this aetion was in consequenee of the injunction‘ it is necessaryto abuse the’ and thatbyfollowing up whathadbeen done and said with simplicity and without perversion those who follow his heresy leada life of unrestrained license.
 ButΙ have learned that Nicolas had nothing to do with any other woman beside her whomhe married, and that of hischildrenthe daughters reaehed old age as virgins, and that theson remained uncorrupted.
 Since this is the case it is clear that the exposureof the wife of whom he was jealousinthe midst of the discipleswastheabandonmentof passion, and that teaching the abuse of the fleshwas continence fromthe pleasures whichhehad sought.
 ForI think that accordingto the command οfthe Saviour hedidnot whish to serve two masters— pleasure andthe Lord.
 They also say that this was the teachingof Matthias, to slight the flesh and abuse it, yielding nothing to it for pleasure, but to make the soul grow through faith and knowledge.
 ” γνώσεως.
 ” ταῦτα μὲν οὖν περὶ τῶν κατὰ τοὺς δηλουμένους χρόνους παραβραβεῦσαι τὴν ἀλήθειαν ἐγκεχειρηκότων, λόγου γε μὴν θᾶττον εἰς τὸ παντελὲς ἀπεσβηκότων εἰρήαθω.
 XXX.
 Ὁ μέντοι Κλήμης, οὗ τὰς φωνὰς ἀρτίως ἀνέγνωμεν, τοῖς προειρημένοις ἑξῆς διὰ τοὺς ἀθετοῦντας τὸν γάμον τοὺς τῶν ἀποστόλων ἐξ.
 ετασθέντας ἐν συζυγίαις καταλέγει, φάσκων·
 “ ἢ καὶ τοὺς ἀποστόλους ἐποδοκιμάσουσιν;
 Πέτρος μὲν γὰρ καὶ Φίλιππος ἐπαιδοποιήσαντο, Φίλιππος δὲ καὶ τὰς θυγατέρας ἀνδράσιν ἐξέδωκεν, καὶ ὅ γε Παῦλος οὐκ ὀκνεῖ ἔν τινι ἐπιστολῇ τὴν αὐτοῦ προασγορεῦααι σύζυγον, ἣν οὐ περιεκόμιζεν διὰ τὸ τῆς ὑπηρεαίας εὐσταλές.
 ” ἐπεὶ δὲ τούτων ἐμνήαθημεν, οὐ λυπεῖ καὶ ἄλλην ἀξιοδιήγητον ἱστορίαν τοῦ αὐτοῦ παραθέσθαι, ἣν ἐν τῷ ἑβδόμῳ Στρωματεῖ τοῦτον ἱστορῶν ἀνέγραφεν τὸν τρόπον·
“ φααὶ γοῦν τὸν μακάριον Πέτρον θεασάμενον τὴν ἑαυτοῦ γυναῖκα ἀπαγομένην τὴν ἔπι θανάτῳ, ἡσθῆναι μὲν τῆς κλήσεως χάριν καὶ τῆς εἰς οἶκον ἀνακομιδῆς, ἐπιφωνῆσαι δὲ εὖ μάλα προτρεπτι·
 καὶ παρακλητικῶς, ἐξ ὀνόματος προσειπόντα῾ μέμνησο, ὦ αὕτη, τοῦ κυρίου.
 ᾿ τοιοῦτος ἦν ὁ τῶν μακαρίων γάμος καὶ ἡ τῶν φιλτάτων τελεία διάθεσις.
” καὶ ταῦταδ᾿, οἰκεῖα ὄντα τῇ μετὰ χεῖρας ὑποθέσει, ἐνταῦθά μοι κατὰ καιρὸν κείσθω.
 XXXΙ.
 Παύλου μὲν οὖν καὶ Πέτρου τῆς τελευτῆς ὅ τε χρόνος καὶ ὁ τρόπος καὶ πρὸς ἔτι τῆς μετὰ τὴν ἀπαλλαγὴν τοῦ βίου τῶν σκηνωμάτων αὐτῶν καταθέσεως ὁ χῶρος ἤδη πρότερον ἡμῖν δεδήλωται·
 τοῦ δὲ Ἰωάννου τὰ μὲν τοῦ Let this suffice concerning the attempts made during this period to triumph against the truth which were, nevertheless, extinguished for ever more quickly than it takes to tell.
 XXX.
 Clement, whose words we cited recently in the context οfthe previous quotation, enumerates,on aeeount of those whoreject marriage, those of the Apostles who were married, saying,“ Or will they disapprove even of the Apostles? For Ρeter and Philip begat children, and Philip even gave his daughters to husbands, while Ρaul himself does not hesitate in one of his letters to address1 his wife whom he did not take about with him in order to facilitate his” Since we have made these quotations there is no harm in adducing another memorable narrative of Clement whleh he wrote down in the seventh bookof the Stromata, and narrates as follows:
“ They say that the blessed Ρeter when he saw his own wife led out to death rejoiced at her ealrmg and atherreturn home, and called out to her in true warning and comfort, addressing herby her name,‘ Remember the’ Such wasthemarriage of the blessedandthe perfeet disposition of those dearest to” Let this, cognate tothe present subject, suffice for the moment.
 XXXI.
 The time and manner of the death of Ρaulandοf Ρeter, and the plaee where their corpses were laid after their departure from this life, have been already described by us.
 The date of the death οf χρόνου ἤδη πως εἴρηται, τὸ δέ γε τοῦ σκηνώματος αὐτοῦ χωρίον ἐξ ἐπιστολῆς Πολυκράτους( τῆς ἐν Ἐφέσῳ παροικίας ἐπίσκοπος οὗτος ἢν) ἐπιδείκνυται, ν Οὐίκτορι Ῥωμαίων ἐπισκόπῳ γράφων, ὁμοῦ τε αὐτοῦ καὶ Φιλίππου μνημονεύει τοῦ ἀποστόλου τῶν τε τούτου θυγατέρων ὧδέ πως·
“ καὶ γὰρ κατὰ τὴν Ἀσίαν μεγάλα στοιχεῖα κεκοίμηται·
 ἅτινα ἀναστήσεται τῇ ἐσχάτῃ ἡμέρᾳ τῆς παρουσίας τοῦ κυρίου, ἐν ἧ ἔρχεται μετὰ δόξης ἐξ οὐρανοῦ καὶ ἀναζητήσει πάντας τοὺς ἁγίους, Φίλιππον τῶν δώδεκα ἀποστόλων, ὃς κεκοίμηται ἐν Ἱεραπόλει καὶ δύο θυγατέρες αὐτοῦ γεγηρακυῖαι παρθένοι καὶ ἡ ἑτέρα αὐτοῦ θυγάτηρ ἐν ἁγίῳ πνεύματι πολιτευσαμένη ἐν Ἐφέσῳ ἀναπαύεται·
 ἔτι δὲ καὶ Ἰωάννης, ὁ ἐπὶ τὸ στῆθος τοῦ κυρίου ἀναπεσών, ὃς ἐγενήθη ἱερεὺς τὸ πέταλον πεφορεκὼς καὶ μάρτυς καὶ διδάσκαλος, οὗτος ἐν Ἐφέσῳ κεκοίμηται.
 ” ταῦτα 4 καὶ περὶ τῆς τῶνδε τελευτῆς·
 καὶ ἐν τῷ Γαΐου δέ, οὗ μικρῷ πρόσθεν ἐμνήσθημεν, διαλόγῳ Πρόκλος, πρὸς ὃν ἐποιεῖτο τὴν ζήτησιν, περὶ τῆς Φιλίππου καὶ τῶν θυγατέρων αὐτοῦ τελευτῆς, συνᾴδων τοῖς ἐκτεθεῖσιν, οὕτω φησίν·
 “ μετὰ τοῦτον προφήτιδες τέσσαρες αἱ Φιλίππου γεγένηνται ἐν Ἱεραπόλει τῇ κατὰ τὴν Ἀσίαν·
 ὁ τάφος αὐτῶν ἐστιν ἐκεῖ καὶ ὁ τοῦ πατρὸς αὐτῶν.
 ” ταῦτα 5 μὲν οὗτος·
 ὁ δὲ Λουκᾶς ἐν ταῖς Πράξεσιν τῶν ἀποστόλων τῶν Φιλίππου θυγατέρων ἐν Καισαρείᾳ τῆς Ἰουδαίας ἅμα τῷ πατρὶ τότε διατριβουσῶν προφητικοῦ τε χαρίσματος ἠξιωμένων John has also been already1 mentioned, and the place of his body is shown by a letter of Polycrates( he was bishop of the diocese of Ephesus) which hewroteto Vietor, bishop of Rome.
 In this hementions both John, Philip the apostle,2 and Philip's daughters as follows:
“ For great luminariessleepin Asia, and they will rise again at the last day of the adventof the Lord, when he shall come with glory from heaven and call backall the saints, such as was Philip, one ofthe twelve apostles, who sleeps at Hierapolis withhistwo daughters who grew oldas virgins and his third daughter 3 who lived in the ΗoΙy Spirit and rests in Ephesus.
 Αnd there is also John, who leaned on the Lord's breast,who wasa priest wearing the mitre, 4 and martyr and and he sleeps at ” So far concerning their deaths.
 Αnd in the dialogue of Gaius, which we mentioneda little earlier, Proclus, with whomhe was disputing, speaks thus about the death of Philip and his daughters and agrees with what has been stated.
“ Αfter him the four daughters of Philip who were prophetesses were at Hierapolisin Αsia.
 Their grave is there and so is their” so he says.
 Αnd Luke in the Acts of the Apostles mentions the daughters of Philip who were then living with their father at Caesarea in Judaea and were vouchsafed the gift of prophecy.
 Ηe says as μνημονεύει, κατὰ λέξιν ὧδέ πως λέγων·
 “ ἤλθομεν εἰς Καισάρειαν, καὶ εἰσελθόντες εἰς τὸν οἶκον Φιλίππου τοῦ εὐαγγελιστοῦ, ὄντος ἐκ τῶν ἑπτά, ἐμείναμεν παρ’ αὐτῷ.
 τούτῳ δὲ ἦσαν παρθένοι θυγατέρες τἐσσαρες προφητεύουσαι.
” Τὰ μὲν οὗν εἰς ἡμετέραν ἐλθόντα γνῶαιν περί τε τῶν ἀποστόλων καὶ τῶν ἀποστολικῶν χρόνων ὧν τε καταλελοίπασιν ἡμῖν ἱερῶν γραμμάτων καὶ τῶν ἀντιλεγομένων μέν, ὅμωςδ’ ἐν πλείσταις ἐκκΛησίαις παρὰ πολλοῖς δεδημοσιευμένων τῶν τε παντελῶς νόθων καὶ τῆς ἀποστολικῆς ὀρθοδοξίας ἀλλοτρίων ἐν τούτοις διειληφότες, ἐπὶ τὴν τῶν ἑξῆς προΐωμεν ἱστορίαν.
 ΧΧΧΙΙ.
 Μετὰ Νέρωνα καὶ Δομετιανὸν κατὰ τοῦτον οὗ νῦν τοὺς χρόνους ἐξετάζομεν, μερικῶς καὶ κατὰ πόλεις ἐξ ἐπαναστάσεως δήμων τὸν καθ’ ἡμῶν κατέχει λόγος ἀνακινηθῆναι διωγμόν·
 ἐν ᾧ Συμεῶνα τὸν τοῦ Κλωπᾶ, ὃν δεύτερον καταστῆναι τῆς ἐν Ἱεροσολύμοις ἐκκλησίας ἐπίσκοπον ἐδηλώσαμεν, μαρτυρίῳ τὸν βίον ἀναλῦσαι παρειλήφαμεν.
 καὶ τούτου μάρτυς αὐτὸς ἐκεῖνος, οὗ διαφόροις ἤδη πρότερον ἐχρησάμεθα φωναῖς, Ἡγήσιππος·
 ὃς δὴ περί τινων αἱρετικῶν ἱστορῶν, ἐπιφέρει δηλῶν ὡς ἄρα ὑπὸ τούτων κατὰ τόνδε τὸν χρόνον ὑπομείνας κατηγορίαν, πολυτρόπως ὁ δηλούμενος ὡς ἂν χριστιανὸς ἐπὶ πλείσταις αἰκισθεὶς ἡμέραις αὐτόν τε τὸν δικαστὴν καὶ τοὺς ἀμφ’ αὐτὸν εἰς τὰ μέγιστα καταπλήξας, τῷ τοῦ κυρίου πάθει παραπλήσιον τέλος ἀπηνέγκατο·
 οὐδὲν δὲ οἷον καὶ τοῦ συγγραφέως ἐπακοῦσαι, αὐτὰ δὴ ταῦτα κατὰ λέξιν ὧδέ πως ἱστοροῦντος“ ἀπὸ τούτων δηλαδὴ τῶν αἱρετικῶν κατηγοροῦσί follows:
“ We cametoCaesarea and entered intothe house οfPhilipthe Evangelist,oneof the seven, and remained with him.
 Αnd he had four daughters who were prophetesses.
” We havenowdescribed the facts which have come to our knowledge concerning the Apostles and their times, the sacred writings which they have left us, those books which are disputed yet nevertheless are used openly by manyin most churches, and thosewhich are altogether fictitiousand foreign toour historic orthodoxy.
 Let us now continue the narrative.
 XXXII.
 Αfter Νero and Domitian tradition says that under the Emperor whose times we are now describing persecution was raised against us sporadically, in some cities, from pupular risings.
 We have learnt thatinit Symeon,the son οf Clopas, whom we showed to have been the second hishop of thechurch at Jerusalem, ended his life in martyrdom.
 The witness for this is that same Hegesippus,of whom we have already quoted several passages.
 Αfter speaking of certain hereties he goes on to explain how Symeon was at this time accused by them and for many days was tortured in various manners for beinga Christain,to the great astonishment ofthe judge and those with him, until he suffered an end like that of the Lord.
 But there is nothing better than to listen to the historian who tells these facts as follows.
“ some οf these( that τινες Σίμωνος τοῦ Κλωπᾶ ὡς ὄντος ἀπὸ Δαυὶδ καὶ Χριστιανοῦ, καὶ οὕτως μαρτυρεῖ ἐτῶν ὢν ρݲκݲ ἐπὶ Τραϊανοῦ Καίσαρος καὶ ὑπατικοῦ Ἀττικοῦ.
 ” φησὶν δὲ ὁ αὐτὸς ὡς ἄρα καὶ τοὺς κατηγόρους αὐτοῦ, ζητουμένων τότε τῶν ἀπὸ τῆς βασιλικῆς Ἰουδαίων φυλῆς, ὡς ἂν ἐξ αὐτῶν ὄντας ἁλῶναι συνέβη.
 λογισμῷ δ’ ἂν καὶ τὸν Συμεῶνα τῶν αὐτοπτῶν καὶ αὐτηκόων εἴποι ἄν τις γεγονέναι τοῦ κυρίου, τεκμηρίῳ τῷ μήκει τοῦ χρόνου τῆς αὐτοῦ ζωῆς χρώμενος καὶ τῷ μνημονεύειν τὴν τῶν εὐαγγελίων γραφὴν Μάριας τῆς τοῦ Κλωπᾶ, οὗ γεγονέναι αὐτὸν καὶ πρότερον ὁ λόγος ἐδήλωσεν.
 Ὁ δ’ αὐτὸς συγγραφεὺς καὶ ἑτέρους ἀπογόνους ἑνὸς τῶν φερομένων ἀδελφῶν τοῦ σωτῆρος, ᾧ ὄνομα Ἰούδας, φησὶν εἰς τὴν αὐτὴν ἐπιβιῶναι βασιλείαν μετὰ τὴν ἤδη πρότερον ἱστορηθεῖσαν αὐτῶν ὑπὲρ τῆς εἰς τὸν χριστὸν πίστεως ἐπὶ Δομετιανοῦ μαρτυρίαν, γράφει δὲ οὕτως·
“ ἔρχονται οὖν καὶ προηγοῦνται πάσης ἐκκλησίας ὡς μάρτυρες καὶ ἀπὸ γένους τοῦ κυρίου, καὶ γενομένης εἰρήνης βαθείας ἐν πάσῃ ἐκκλησίᾳ, μένουσι μέχρι Τραϊανοῦ Καίσαρος, μέχρις οὗ ὁ ἐκ θείου τοῦ κυρίου, ὁ προειρημένος Σίμων υἱὸς Κλωπᾶ, συκοφαντηθεὶς ὑπὸ τῶν αἱρέσεων ὡσαύτως κατηγορήθη καὶ αὐτὸς ἐπὶ τῷ αὐτῷ λόγῳ ἐπὶ Ἀττικοῦ τοῦ ὑπατικοῦ.
 καὶ ἐπὶ πολλαῖς ἡμέραις αἰκιζόμενος ἐμαρτύρησεν, ὡς πάντας ὑπερθαυμάζειν καὶ τὸν ὑπατικὸν πῶςμ’ τυγχάνων ἐτῶν ὑπέμεινεν, καὶ ἐκελεύσθη σταυρωθῆωαι.
” Ἐπὶ τούτοις ὁ αὐτὸς ἀνὴρ διηγούμενος τὰ κατὰ is to say the heretics) accused simon the son of Clopas of being deseended from David anda Christian and thus he suffered martyrdom, beinga hundred andtwenty years old, when Trajan was emperor and Atticus was” The Same Writer says that his aecusers also soffered arrest for being of the royal house of the Jews when search was made at that time for those of that family.
 Αnd οne would reasonably say that Symeon was one of the eyewitnesses and actual hearers of the Lord on the evidence of the lengthof his life and the referenee in the Gospels to Μary the wife of Clopas whose son the narrative has already shown him to be.
 The same writer says that other grandsons of one ofthe so- called brethren of the saviour named Judas survived to the same reign after they had given in the time of Domitian the testimony already recorded of them in behalf of the faith in Christ.
 Ηe writes thus:
“ They came therefore and presided over every chureh as witnesses belonging to the Lord's family,and when therewas complete peace in every cherch they survived until the reign of the Emperor Trajan, until the time when the son of the Lord's uncle, 2 the aforesaid Simon the sonof Clopas,was similarly accused by the sects on the same charge before Atticus the Consular.
 Ηe was torturedfor many days andgavehiS witness,so that all, even the consular, were extremely surprised how, at theage of onehundredand twenty,he endured,and he was eommanded tobe” Besides thistheSame writer, explaining the events τοὺς δηλουμένους, ἐπιλέγει ὡς ἄρα μέχρι τῶν τότε χρόνων παρθένος καθαρὰ καὶ ἀδιάφθορος ἔμεινεν ἡ ἐκκλησία, ἐν ἀδήλῳ που σκότει ὡς εἰ φωλευόντων εἰς ἔτι τότε τῶν, εἰ καί τινες ὑπῆρχον, παραφθείρειν ἐπιχειρούντων τὸν ὑγιῆ κανόνα τοῦ σωτηρίου κηρύγματος·
 ὡς δ’ ὁ ἱερὸς τῶν ἀποστόλων χορὸς διάφορον εἰλήφει τοῦ βίου τέλος παρεληλύθει τε ἡ γενεὰ ἐκείνη τῶν αὐταῖς ἀκοαῖς τῆς ἐνθέου σοφίας ἐπακοῦσαι κατηξιωμένων, τηνικαῦτα τῆς ἀθέου πλάνης ἀρχὴν ἐλάμβανεν ἡ σύστασις διὰ τῆς τῶν ἑτεροδιδασκάλων ἀπάτης, οἳ καὶ ἅτε μηδενὸς ἔτι τῶν ἀποστόλων λειπομένου, γυμνὴ λοιπὸν ἤδη κεφαλῇ τῷ τῆς κηρύγματι τὴν ψευδώνυμον γνῶσιν ἀντικηρύττειν ἐπεχείρουν.
 XXXIII.
 τοσοῦτός γε μὴν ἐν πλείοσι τόποις ὁ καθ’ ἡμῶν ἐπετάθη τότε διωγμός, ὡς Πλίνιον Σεκοῦνδον, ἐπισημότατον ἡγεμόνων, ἐπὶ τῷ πλήθει τῶν μαρτύρων κινηθέντα, βασιλεῖ κοινώσασθαι περὶ τοῦ πλήθους τῶν ὑπὲρ τῆς πίστεως ἀναιρουμένων,δ’ ἐν ταὐτῷ μηνῦσαι μηδὲν ἀνόσιον μηδὲ παρὰ τοὺς νόμους πράττειν κατειληφέναι, πλὴν τό γε ἅμα τῆ ἕῳ διεγειρομένους τὸν Χριστὸν θεοῦ δίκην ὑμνεῖν, τὸ δὲ μοιχεύειν καὶ φονεύειν καὶ τὰ συγγενῆ τούτοις ἀθέμιτα πλημμελήματα καὶ αὐτοὺς ἀπαγορεύειν πάντα τε πράττειν ἀκολούθως τοῖς νόμοις·
 πρὸς ἃ τὸν Τραϊανὸν δόγμα τοιόνδε τεθεικέναι, τὸ χριστιανῶν φῦλον μὴ ἐκζητεῖσθαι μέν, ἐμπεσὸν δὲ χριστιανῶν δι’ οὗ ποσῶς μὲν τοῦ διωγμοῦ σβεσθῆναι τὴν ἀπειλὴν σφοδρότατα ἐγκειμένην, οὐ χεῖρόν γε μὴν τοῖς κακουργεῖν περὶ ἡμᾶς ἐθέλουσιν λείπεσθαι of these times, adds that until then the church remained a pureand uncorrupted virgin, for those who attempted to corrupt the healthful rule of the Saviour's preaching,if they existedat all, lurked in obscure darlness.
 But when the sacred band of the Apostles and the generation of those to whom it had been vouchsafed to hear with their own ears the divine wisdom had reached the several endsof their lives, then the federation of godless error took its beginning through the deceit of false teachers who, seeing that none of theApostles still remained, barefacedly tried against the preaching of the truth the counter- proclamation οf“ knowledge falsely so- called.
” XXXIII.
 The persecution which at that time was extended against us in many places was so greatthat Plinius secundus, one of the most distinguished governors, was disturbed at the number of the martyrs, and reportedto the Emperorthe number of those being put to death for the faith, and in the same document mentioned that he understood them to do nothing wicked or illegal except that they rose at dawnto sing to Christasthougha God, and that theythemselves forbade adultery, murder and similar terrible crimes, and that theydid eVerything in obedieneeto the law.
 In answer to this Trajan issueda decree to the effect that the tribe of Christians should not be sought for but punished when it was met with.
 By this means the imminent threat of persecution was extinguished to some extent, but none the less opportunities remained to those who wished to harm προφάσεις, ἔσθ’ ὅπη μὲν τῶν δήμων, ἔσθ’ ὅπῃ δὲ καὶ τῶν κατὰ χώρας ἀρχόντων τὰς καθ’ ἡμῶν συσκευαζομένων ἐπιβουλάς, ὡς καὶ ἄνευ προθανῶν διωγμῶν μερικοὺς κατ’ ἐπαρχίαν ἐξάπτεσθαι πλείους τε τῶν πιστῶν διαφόροις ἐναγωνίζεσθαι μαρτυρίοις.
 εἴληπται δ’ ἡ ἱστορία ἐξ ἧς ἀνώτερον δεδηλώκαμεν τοῦ Τερτυλλιανοῦ Ῥωμαϊκῆς ἀπολογίας, ἧς ἡ ἑρμηνεία τοῦτον ἔχει τὸν τρόπον“ καίτοι εὑρήκαμεν καὶ τὴν εἰς ἡμᾶς ἐπιζήτησιν κεκωλυμένην.
 Πλίνιος γὰρ Σεκοῦνδος ἡγούμενος ἐπαρχίου κατακρίνας Χριστιανούς τινας καὶ τῆς ἀξίας ἐκβαλών, ταραχθεὶς τῷ πλήθει, διὸ ἠγνόει τί αὐτῷ λοιπὸν εἴη πρακτέον, Τραϊανῷ τῷ βασιλεῖ ἀνεκοινώσατο λέγων ἔξω τοῦ μὴ βούλεαθαι αὐτοὺς ἀνεκοινώσατο οὐδὲν ἀνόσιον ἐν αὐτοῖς εὑρηκέναι·
 ἐμήνυεν δὲ καὶ τοῦτο, ἀνίστασθαι ἕωθεν τοὺς Χριστιανοὺς καὶ τὸν χριστὸν θεοῦ δίκην ὑμνεῖν καὶ πρὸς τὸ τὴν ἐπιστήμην αὐτῶν διαφυλάσσειν κωλύεσθαι φονεύειν, μοιχεύειν, πλεονεκτεῖν, ἀποστερεῖν καὶ τὰ τούτοις ὅμοια.
 πρὸς ταῦτα ἀντέγραφεν Τραϊανὸς τὸ τῶν χριστιανῶν φῦλον μὴ ἐκζητεῖσθαι μέν, ἐμπεσὸν δὲ κολάζεσθαι.
” καὶ ταῦτα μὲν ἐν τούτοις ἢν.
 ΧΧΧΙV.
 ῶν δ’ ἐπὶ Ρώμης ἐπισκόπων ἔτει τρίτῳ τῆς τοῦ προειρημένου βασιλέως ἀρχῆς Κλήμης Εὐαρέστῳ παραδοὺς τὴν λειτουργίαν ἀναλύει τὸν βίον, τὰ πάντα προστὰς ἔτεσιν ἐννέα τῆς τοῦ θείου λόγου διδασκαλίας.
 ΧΧΧV.
 Ἀλλὰ καὶ τοῦ Συμεῶνος τὸν δηλωθέντα τελειωθέντος τρόπον, τῆς ἐν Ἱεροσολύμοις ἐπισκοπῆς θρόνον Ἰουδαῖός τις ὄνομα Ἰοῦστος, μυρίων ὅσων ἐκ περιτομῆς εἰς τὸν χριστὸν τηνι-us.
 sometimes the populace, sometimes even the loeal authorities contrivedplots against us, so that with no pen persecution partial attacks broke out in various provinces and many of the faithful endured martyrdom in various ways.
 The narrative has been taken from the Latin apology of Tertullian mentioned above of which the translation is as follows:
“ Υet we found that this attempt against uswas also prevented, for the governorof the province, Pliny secundus, after eondemning certain Christians and depriving them of their rank, was troubled at their number and, not knowing what to dointhe future, eommunieated withthe Emperor Trajan.
 saying that beyond their unwillingness to offersacrifice to idols, he had found nothing wicked in them.
 Ηe also mentioned this that the Christians arose at dawn and sang a hymn to Christ asa God, and in order to preserve their teaching1 forbade murder, adultery, covetousness, robbery,and suchlike.
 To this Trajan senta rescript that the tribeof Christians should not be sought out but punished if met ” such were the events at that time.
 XXXIV.
 In the third year of the afore- mentioned emperor, Clement handed over the ministry of the bishops of Rome to Evarestos and departed this life, having been in charge of the teaching of the diving word for nine years.
 XXXV.
 Μoreover, when Symeon suffered martyrdom in the manner already deseribeda certian Jew named Justus, who was one of the many thousands of the circumcision who by that time had belived on καῦτα πεπιστευκότων εἷς καὶ αὐτὸς ὤν, δέχεται.
 XXXVI.
 Διέπρεπέν γε μὴν κατὰ τούτους ἐπὶ τῆς Ἀσίας τῶν ἀποστόλων ὁμιλητὴς Πολύκαρπος, τῆς κατὰ Σμύρναν ἐκκλησίας πρὸς τῶν αὐτοπτῶν καὶ ὑπηρετῶν τοῦ κυρίου τὴν ἐπισκοπὴν ἐγκεχειρισμένος·
 καθ’ ὃν ἐγνωρίζετο Παπίας, τῆς ἐν Ἱεραπόλει παροικίας καὶ αὐτὸς ἐπίσκοπος, ὅ τε παρὰ πλείστοις εἰς ἔτι νῦν διαβόητος Ἰγνάτιος, τῆς κατὰ Ἀντιόχειαν Πέτρου διαδοχῆς δεύτερος τὴν ἐπισκοπὴν κεκληρωμένος.
 λόγος δ’ ἔχει τοῦτον ἀπὸ Συρίας ἐπὶ τὴν‘ Ρωμαίων πόλιν ἀναπεμφθέντα, θηρίων γενέσθαι βορὰν τῆς εἰς χριστὸν μαρτυρίας ἕνεκεν·
 καὶ δὴ τὴν δι’ Ἀσίας ἀνακομιδὴν μετ’ ἐπιμελεστάτης φρουρῶν φυλακῆς ποιούμενος, τὰς κατὰ πόλιν αἷς ἐπεδήμει, παροικίας ταῖς διὰ λόγων ὁμιλίαις τε καὶ προτροπαῖς ἐπιρ- ρωννύς, ἐν πρώτοις μάλιστα προφυλάττεσθαι τὰς αἱρέσεις ἄρτι τότε πρῶτον ἐπιπολαζούσας παρῄνει προύτρεπέν τε ἀπρὶξ ἔχεσθαι τῆς τῶν ἀποστόλων παραδόσεως, ἢν ὑπὲρ ἀσφαλείας καὶ ἐγγράφως ἤδη μαρτυρόμενος διατυποῦσθαι ἀναγκαῖον ἡγεῖτο.
 Ιgn.
 Eph.
 21 οὕτω δῆτα ἐν Σμύρνη γενόμενος, ἔνθα ὁ Πολύκαρπος ἢν, μίαν μὲν τῇ κάτα τὴν Ἔφεσον ἐπιστολὴν Magn.
 ἐκκλησίᾳ γράφει, ποιμένος αὐτῆς μνημονεύων Ὀνησίμου, ἑτέραν δὲ τῆ ἐν Μαγνησίᾳ τῆ πρὸς Μαιάνδρῳ, ἔνθα πάλιν ἐπισκόπουΔαμᾶ μνήμην πεποίηται, καὶ τῆ ἐν Τράλλεσι δὲ ἄλλην, ἦς ἄρχοντα τότε ὄντα Πολύβιον ἱστορεῖ.
 πρὸς ταύταις καὶ τῆ Ῥωμαίων ἐκκλησίᾳ γράφει, ἧ καὶ παράκλησιν προτείνει ὡς μὴ παραιτησάμενοι τοῦ μαρτυρίου τῆς ποθουμένης αὐτὸν ἀποστερήσαιεν Christ, succeeded tothe throne of the bishopricof Jerusalem.
 XXXVI.
 Αt this time there flourishedin Asia Polycarp, the companionof the Apostles, who had been appointed to the bishopric of the church in Smyrna by The eyewitnesses and ministersofthe Lord.
 Distinguished men at the sametime were Papias, who was himself bishop of the diocese of Hierapolis, and Ignatius, still a name of notetomost men, the second after Ρeter to succeed to the bishopric of Antioch.
 The story goes that he was sent from Syria to Rome to be eaten by beasts in testimony to Christ.
 Ηe was taken through Asia under most careful guard, and strengthened by his speech and exhortation the diocese of eaeh city in which he stayed.
 Ηe particularly warned them to be on their guard against the heresies which then for the first time were beginning to obtain, and exhorted them to hold fast to the tradition of the Apostles, to whichhe thought necessary, for safety's sake, to givethe form of written testimony.
 Thus while he was in Smyrna where Polycarp was, he wrote one letter to the church at Ephesus, mentioning their pastor Onesimus, and anotherto the churchatMangnessia on the Meander(and here, too,he mentioned the bishop Damas), and another to the church in Tralles, of which he relates that Polybius was then the ruler.
 In addition to these he also wrote to the churcb at Rome, and to it he extendedtherequest that they shouldnot deprive himof the hopeforwhich he longed by begging him off from his martyrdom.
 It ἐλπίδος·
 ἐξ ὧν καὶ βραχύτατα εἰς ἐπίδειξιν τῶν εἰρημένων παραθέσθαι ἄξιον.
 γράφει δὴ οὖν κατὰ λέξιν·
“ ἀπὸ Συρίας μέχρι Ρώμης θηριομαχῶ μαχῶ διὰ γῆς καὶ θαλάσσης, νυκτὸς καὶ ἡμέρας, ἐν.
 δεδεμένος δέκα λεοπάρδοις, ὅ ἐστιν στρατιωτικὸν τάγμα, οἳ καὶ εὐεργετούμενοι χείρονες γίνονται, ἐν δὲ τοῖς ἀδικήμασιν αὐτῶν μᾶλλον μαθητεύομαι·
 ἀλλ’ οὐ παρὰ τοῦτο δεδικαίωμαι.
 ὀναίμην τῶν θηρίων τῶν ἐμοὶ ἑτοίμων, ἃ καὶ εὔχομαι σύντομά μοι εὑρεθῆναι·
 ἃ καὶ κολακεύσω συντόμως με καταφαγεῖν, οὐχ ὥσπερ τινῶν δειλαινόμενα οὐχ ἥψαντο, κἄν αὐτὰ δὲ ἄκοντα μὴ θέλῃ, ἐγὼ συγγνώμην μοι ἔχετε·
 τί μοι συμφέρει, ἐγὼ γινώσκω, νῦν ἄρχομαι μαθητὴς εἶναι.
 μηδέν με ζηλώσαι τῶν ὁρατῶν καὶ ἀοράτων, ἵνα Ἰησοῦ χριστοῦ ἐπιτύχω·
 πῦρ καὶ σταυρὸς θηρίων τε συστάσεις, σκορπισμοὶ ὀστέων, συγκοπαὶ μελῶν, ἀλεσμοὶ ὅλου τοῦ σώματος, κολάσεις τοῦ διαβόλου εἰς ἐμὲ ἐρχέσθωσαν, μόνον ἵνα Ἰησοῦ χριστοῦ ἐπιτύχω.
” Καὶ ταῦτα μὲν ἀπὸ τῆς δηλωθείσης πόλεως ταῖς καταλεχθείσαις ἐκκλησίαις διετυπώσατο·
 ἤδη δ’ ἐπέκεινα τῆς Σμύρνης γενόμενος, ἀπὸ Τρωάδος τοῖς τε ἐν Φιλαδελφίᾳ αὖθις διὰ γραφῆς ὁμιλεῖ καὶ τῆ Σμυρναίων ἐκκλησίᾳ ἰδίως τε τῷ ταύτης προηγουμένῳ Πολυκάρπῳ·
 ὃν οἷα δὴ ἀποστολικὸν ἄνδρα εὗ μάλα γνωρίζων, τὴν κατ’ Ἀντιόχειαν αὐτῷ ποίμνην οἷα γνήσιος καὶ ἀγαθὸς ποιμὴν παρατίθεται, τὴν περὶ αὐτῆς φροντίδα διὰ σπουδῆς ἔχειν αὐτὸν ἀξιῶν.
 ὁ δ’ αὐτὸς Σμυρναίοις γράφων, οὐκ ἶδ’ ὁπόθεν ῥητοῖς συγκέχρηται, τοιαῦτά τινα περὶ τοῦ ριστοῦ διεξιών·
 “ ἐγὼ δὲ is worth while appendinga short extract from this in support οf what has been said.
 Ηe writes as follows:
“ From Syria to RomeI am fightingwithwild beasts,by land and sea, by nightand day, bound to ten‘ leopards’( that is,a company οf soldiers), and they become worse for kind treatment.
 ΝowI become the morea disciple fortheirill deeds,‘ but not by this amI justified. ’
I long for the beasts that are preparedfor me;
 andI pray that they maybe found prompt for me;
I will even entice them to devour me promptly;
 not as hashappenedto some whom they have not touched from fear;
 even if they be unwillingof themselves,I will force them to it.
 Grant me this favour.
I know whatis expcdient for me;
 nowI am beginningto bea disciple.
 MayI envy nothing of things seen οr unseen that 1 may attain to Jesus christ.
 Let there come οn me fire, and cross, and struggles with wild beasts, cutting,and tearing asunder, rackings of bones, mangling of limbs, crushing οf my whole nody, cruel torturesοf the devil, mayIbut attain to Jesus Christ.
” This he put into words from the city mentioned to the churehes named.
 When he had already passed beyond Smyrna he also again conversed in writing from Troas with those in Philadelphia and with the church of the Smyrnaeans, and especially with Polycarp who was then the head of this church.
 Ηe knew well that Polycarp wasan apostolic man and like a true and good shepherd commends the flock at Antioch to him, asking him to be zealous in his care for it.
 Ηe also wrote to the Smyranaeans quoting words fromI know not what source and discoursing thus about Christ:
“ ForI know and believe that καὶ μετὰ τὴν ἀνάστασιν ἐν σαρκὶ αὐτὸν οἶδα καὶ πιστεύω ὄντα.
 καὶ ὅτε πρὸς τοὺς περὶ Πέτρον ἐλήλυθεν, ἔφη αὐτοῖς·
‘ λάβετε, ψηλαψήσατέ με καὶ ἴδετε ὅτι οὐκ εἰμὶ δαιμόνιον ἀσώματον·’
 καὶ εὐθὺς αὐτοῦ ἥψαντο καὶ ἐπίστευσαν.
” Οἶδεν δὲ αὐτοῦ τὸ μαρτύριον καὶ ὁ Εἰρηναῖος, καὶ τῶν ἐπιστολῶν αὐτοῦ μνημονεύει, λέγων οὕτως·
“ ὡς εἶπέν τις τῶν ἡμετέρων, διὰ τὴν πρὸς θεὸν μαρτυρίαν κατακριθεὶς πρὸς θηρία, ὅτι ‘ σῖτός εἰμι θεοῦ καὶ δι’ ὀδόντων θηρίων ἀλήθομαι, ἵνα καθαρὸς ἄρτος εὑρεθῶ. ’
” Καὶ ὁ Πολύκαρπος δὲ τούτων αὐτῶν μέμνηται ἐν τῇ φερομένῃ αὐτοῦ πρὸς Φιλιππησίους ἐπιστολῇ φάσκων αὐτοῖς ῥήμασιν·
“ παρακλῶ οὖν πάντας ὑμᾶς πειθαρχεῖν καὶ ἀσκεῖν πᾶσαν ὑπομονήν, ἣν εἴδετε κατ’ ὀφθαλμοὺς οὐ μόνον ἐν τοῖς μακαρίοις Ἰγνατίῳ καὶ Ῥούφῳ καὶ Ζωσίμῳ, ἀλλὰ καὶ ἐν ἄλλοις τοῖς ἐξ ὑμῶν καὶ ἐν αὐτῷ Παύλῳ καὶ τοῖς λοιποῖς ἀποστόλοις, πεπεισμένους ὅτι οὗτοι πάντες οὐκ εἰς κενὸν ἔδραμον, ἀλλ᾿ ἐν πίστει καὶ δικαιοσύνῃ, καὶ ὄτι εἰς τὸν ὀφειλόμενον αὐτοῖς τόπον εἰσὶν παρὰ κυρίῳ, ᾧ καὶ συνέπαθον.
 οὐ γὰρ τὸν νῦν ἠγάπησαν αἰῶνα, ἀλλὰ τὸν ὑπὲρ ἡμῶν ἀποθανόντα καὶ δι’ ἡμᾶς ὑπὸ τοῦ θεοῦ ἀναστάντα.
” καὶ ἑξῆς ἐπιφέρει·
 “ ἐγράψατέ μοι καὶ ὑμεῖς καὶ Ἰγνάτιος, ἵν᾿ ἐάν τις ἀπέρχηται εἰς Συρίαν, καὶ τὰ παρ’ ὑμῶν ἀποκομίσῃ γράμματα·
 ὅπερ ποιήσω, ἐὰν λάβω καιρὸν εὔθετον, εἴτε ἐγὼ εἴτε ὃν πέμπω πρεσβεύσοντα καὶ περὶ ὑμῶν.
 τὰς ἐπιστολὰς Ἰγνατίου τὰς πεμφθείσας ἡμῖν ὑπ’ αὐτοῦ καὶ ἄλλας ὅσας εἴχομεν παρ’ ἡμῖν, ἐπέμψαμεν ὑμῖν, καθὼς ἐνετείλασθε·
 αἴτινες ὑπο- he wasinthe flesh even after the Resurrection.
 Αnd when he came to those with Ρeter he said to them:
‘ Take, handle me and see thatΙ am notaphantom withouta body.’
 Αnd they immediatelytouchedhim and believed.
” Ιrenaeus also knew of his martyrdomandquotes his letters saying thus:
“ Αs oneofthe Christians said when he was condemned to the beaSts as testimony for God,‘Ι am the wheatofGod andΙam ground bythe teeth of beasts thatI may be found pure bread.’
” Ρolycarp, too, mentions these same things in the letter to the Philippians bearing his name and says:
“ ΝowI beseech youallto obey the word of righteousness, and to practise all the endurance which you also saw before your eyes, not onlyinthe blessed Ignatius, and Zosimus, and Rufus, but also in others among yourselves, andinPual himself, and in the other Apostles;
 being persuaded that all of these‘ ran notin vain,’ but in faith and righteousness, and that they are with the Lord in the‘ place whieh is their’ with whom they also suffered.
 For they did not‘ love this present world’ but him who diedon our behalf, and was raised by God for our” Αndhe continues later,“ Both you and Ignatius wrote to me that if anyone was going to Syria he shovld also take your lettersΙ will do this if Ι havea convenient opportunity, either myself or the man whom Ι am sending as a representative for you and me.
 We send you,as you asked, the lettersof Ιgnatius, which were sent tous by him,and others whichwe had byusThese are subjoined τεταγμέναι εἰσὶν τῇ ἐπιστολῇ ταύτῃ·
 ἐξ μεγάλα ὠφεληθῆναι δυνήσεσθε.
 περιέχουσι γὰρ πίστιν καὶ ὑπομονὴν καὶ πᾶσαν οἰκοδομὴν τὴν εἰς τὸν κύριον ἡμῶν ἀνήκουσαν.
” καὶ τὰ μὲν περὶ τὸν Ἰγνάτιον τοιαῦτα·
 διαδέχεται δὲ μετ’ αὐτὸν τὴν Ἀντιοχείας ἐπισκοπὴν Ἥρως.
 XXXVII.
 Τῶν δὲ κατὰ τούτους διαλαμψάντων καὶ Κοδράτος ἢν, ὃν ἅμα ταῖς Φιλίππου θυγατράσιν προφητικῷ χαρίσματι λόγος ἔχει διαπρέψαι, καὶ ἄλλοιδ’ ἐπὶ τούτοις πλείους ἐγνωρίζοντο κατὰ τούσδε, τὴν πρώτην τάξιν τῆς τῶν ἀποστόλων ἐπέχοντες διαδοχῆς·
 οἳ καί, ἅτε τηλικῶνδε ὄντες θεοπρεπεῖς μαθηταί, τοὺς κατὰ πάντα τόπον τῶν ἐκκλησιῶν προκαταβληθέντας ὑπὸ τῶν ἀποστόλων θεμελίους ἐπῳκοδόμουν, αὔξοντες εἰς πλέον τὸ κήρυγμα καὶ τὰ σωτήρια σπέρματα τῆς τῶν οὐρανῶν βασιλείας ἀνὰ πᾶσαν εἰς πλάτος ἐπι- σπείροντες τὴν οἴκου μένην.
 καὶ γὰρ δὴ πλεῖστοι τῶν τότε μαθητῶν σφοδροτέρῳ φιλοσοφίας ἔρωτι πρὸς τοῦ θείου λόγου τὴν Ψυχὴν πληττόμενοι, τὴν σωτήριον πρότερον ἀπεπλήρουν παρακέλευσιν, ἐνδεέσιν νέμοντες τὰς οὐσίας, εἶτα δὲ ἀποδημίας στελλόμενοι ἔργον ἐπετέλουν εὐαγγελιστῶν, τοῖς ἔτι πάμπαν ἀνηκόοις τοῦ τῆς πίστεως λόγου κηρύττειν φιλοτιμούμενοι καὶ τὴν τῶν θείων εὐαγγελίων παραδιδόναι γραφήν.
 οὗτοι δὲ θε- μελίους τῆς πίστεως ἔπι ξἑνοις τισι τόποις αὐτὸ μόνον καταβαλλόμενοι ποιμένας τε καθιστάντες ἑτέρους τούτοις τε αὐτοῖς ἐγχειρίζουτες τὴν τῶν ἀρτίως εἰσαχθέντων γεωργίαν, ἑτέρας αὐτοὶ πάλιν χώρας τε καὶ ἔθνη μετῄεσαν σὺν τῇ ἐκ θεοῦ χάριτι καὶ συνεργίᾳ, ἐπεὶ καὶ τοῦ θείου πνεύματος εἰς to this letter, and you will be able to benefit greatly from them.
 For they contian faith, patience,and all the edification which pertains to our Lord.
” such is the story concerning Ignatius, and Ηeros succeeded to the bishopric of Antioch after him.
 XXXVII.
 Among those who were famous at this timewas also Quadratus, of whom traffition says that he shared viththe daughters of Philip the ffistinc- tion ofa prophetic gift.
 Αnd many others besides them were well known at this time and take the first rank in the Apostolic succession.
 These pious foundations οf the churches laid by the Apostles.
 They spread the preaching and scattered the saving seeds of the kingdomof Heaven, sowing them broad- cast through the whole world.
 Many of those then disciples, smitten inthe soul bythe divine Logos with an ardent passion for the love of wisdom,1 first fulfilledthe Saviour's command and distributed their propertyto the needy, then, starting on their ourney, took up the work of evangelists and were zealous to preach to all who had notyet heard the word of the faith, and to transmit the writhing of the divine Gospels.
 Αs soon as they had no more than laid the foundations of the faith in some strange place, they appointed others as shepherds and had been just brought in, but they themselves passed on again to other lands and peoples, helped by the grace and co- operation of God, seeing that ἔτι τότε δι’ αὐτῶν πλεῖσται παράδοξοι δυνάμεις ἐνήργουντο,1 ὥστε ἀπὸ πρώτης ἀκροάσεως ἀθρόως αὔτανδρα πλήθη προθύμως τὴν εἰς τὸν τῶν ὅλων δημιουργὸν εὐσέβειαν ἐν ταῖς αὐτῶν Ψυχαῖς καταδέχεσθαι.
 Ἀδυνάτου δ’ ὄντος ἡμῖν ἅπαντας ἐξ ὀνόματος ἀπαριθμεῖσθαι ὅδοι ποτὲ κατὰ τὴν πρώτην τῶν ἀποστόλων διαδοχὴν ἐν ταῖς κατὰ τὴν οἰκουμένην ἐκκλησίαις γεγόνασιν ποιμένες ἢ καὶ εὐαγγελισταί, τούτων εἰκότως ἐξ ὀνόματος γραφῆ μόνων τὴν μνήμην κατατεθείμεθα, ὧν ἔτι καὶ νῦν εἰς ἡμᾶς δι’ ὑπομνημάτων τῆς ἀποστολικῆς διδασκαλίας ἢ παράδοσις φέρεται, ΧΧΧVIII.
 Ἕσπερ οὗν ἀμέλει τοῦ Ἰγνατίου ἐν αἷς κατελέξαμεν ἐπι- στολαῖς, καὶ τοῦ Κλήμεντος ἐν τῆ ἀνωμολογημένῃ παρὰ παρὰ πᾶσιν, ἢν ἐκ προσώπου τῆς Ρωμαίων ἐκκλησίας τῆ Κορινθίων διετυπώσατο·
 ἐν ἧ τῆς πρὸς Ἑβραίους πολλὰ νοήματα παραθείς, ἤδη δὲ καὶ αὐτολεξεὶ ῥητοῖς τισιν ἐξ ἀύτης χρησάμενος, σαφέστατα παρίστησιν ὅτι μὴ νέον ὑπάρχει τὸ σύγγραμμα, ὅθεν δὴ καὶ εἰκότως ἔδοξεν αὐτὸ τοῖς λοιποῖς ἐγκαταλεχθῆναι γράμμασι τοῦ ἀποστόλου.
 Ἑβραίοις γὰρ διὰ τῆς πατρίου γλώττης ἐγγράφως ὡμιληκότος τοῦ Παύλου, οἳ μὲν τὸν εὐαγγελιστὴν Δουκᾶν, οἳ δὲ τὸν Κλήμεντα τοῦτον αὐτὸν ἑρμηνεῦσαι λέγουσι τὴν γραφήν·
 ὃ καὶ μᾶλλον ἂν εἴη ἀληθὲς τῷ τὸν ὅμοιον τῆς φράσεως χαρακτῆρα τήν τε τοῦ Κλήμεντος ἐπιστολὴν καὶ τὴν πρὸς Ἑβραίους ἀποσῲζειν καὶ τῷ μὴ πόρρω τὰ ἐν ἑκατέροις τοῖς συγγράμμασι νοήματα καθεστάναι.
 Ἰστέον δ’ ὡς καὶ δευτέρα τις εἶναι λέγεται τοῦ many strange miracles οf the divine spirit were at that time still being wrought by them, So that whole crowds of men at the first hearing eagerly receivedin their souls the religion of the Creator οf the universe.
 It is impossible for us to give the number and the names of all who first succeeded the Apostles, and were shepherds or evangelists in the churches throughout the world.
 It was, therefore, natural for us to recorded by name the memory only of those of whom the tradition still surviveS to our time by their treatises onthe Apostolic teaching.
 XXXVIII.
 such writings, of course, were the letters of Ignatius of which we gave the list, and the Εpistle of Clement whichis recognized by all, which he wrote in the name of the church of the Romans to that οf the Corinthians.
 In this hehas many thoughts parallel to the Εpistleto the Ηebrews, and aetuahy makes some verbal quotations from it showing elearly that it was nota recent production, and for this reason, too,it has seemed natural to include it among the οther writings of the Apostle.
 For Ρaul had Spoken in writing to the Ηebrews in their native language, and somesay that theevangelist Luke, others that this same Clement translated the writing.
 Αnd the truth οf this would be supported by the similarity of style preserved by the Epistle of Clement and that tothe Hebrewss,and by the little difference between the thoughts in both writings.
 It must be known that there is alsoa second Κλήμεντος ἐπιατολή, οὐ μὴν ἔθ’ ὁμοίως τῆ προτέρᾳ καὶ ταύτην γνώριμον ἐπιστάμεθα, ὅτι μηδὲ τοὺς ἀρχαίους αὐτῇ κεχρημένους ἴσαμεν.
 ἤδη δὲ καὶ ἕτερα πολυεπῆ καὶ μακρὰ συγγράμματα ὡς τοῦ αὐτοῦ χθὲς καὶ πρῴην τινὲς προήγαγον, Πέτρου δὴ καὶ Ἀπίωνος διαλόγους περιέχοντα·
 ὧν οὐδ’ ὅλως μνήμη τις παρὰ τοῖς παλαιοῖς φέρεται, οὐδὲ γὰρ καθαρὸν τῆς ἀποστολικῆς ὀρθοδοξίας ἀποσῴζει τὸν χαρακτῆρα.
 XXXIX.
Ἡ μὲν οὖν τοῦ Κλήμεντος ὁμολογουμένη γραφὴ πρόδηλος, εἴρηται δὲ καὶ τὰ Ἰγνατίου καὶ Πολυκάρπου·
 τοῦ δὲ Παπία συγγράμματα πέντε τὸν ἀριθμὸν φέρεται, ἃ καὶ ἐπιγέγραπται Λογίων κυριακῶν ἐξηγήσεως.
 τούτων καὶ Εἱρηναῖος ὡς μόνων αὐτῷ γραφέντων μνημονεύει, ὧδέ πως λέγων·
 “ ταῦτα δὲ καὶ Παπίας ὁ Ἰωάννου μὲν ἀκουστής, Πολυκάρπου δὲ ἑταῖρος γεγονώς, ἀρχαῖος ἀνήρ, ἐγγράφως ἐπιμαρτυρεῖ ἐν τῇ τετάρτῃ ἑαυτοῦ βιβλίων.
 ἔστιν γὰρ αὐτῷ πέντε βιβλία συντεταγμένα.
” καὶ ὁ μὲν Εἰρήναιος ταῦτα·
 αὐτός γε μὴν ὁ Παπίας κατὰ τὸ προοίμιον τῶν αὐτοῦ λόγων ἀκροατὴν μὲν καὶ αὐτόπτην οὐδαμῶς ἑαυτὸν γενέσθαι τῶν ἱερῶν ἀποστόλων ἐμφαίνει, παρειληφέναι δὲ τὰ τῆς πίστεως παρὰ τῶν ἐκείνοις γνωρίμων διδάσκει δι’ ὧν φησιν λέξεων·
 ““ οὐκ ὀκνήσω δέ ἀοῖ καὶ ὅσα ποτὲ παρὰ τῶν πρεσβυτέρων καλῶς ἔμαθον καὶ καλῶς ἐμνημόνευσα, συγκατατάξαι ταῖς ἑρμηνείαις, διαβεβαιούμενος ὑπὲρ αὐτῶν ἀλήθειαν.
 οὐ γὰρ τοῖς τὰ πολλὰ λέγουσιν ἔχαιρον ὥσπερ οἱ πολλοί, ἀλλὰ τοῖς τἀληθῆ διδάσκουσιν, οὐδὲ τοῖς τὰς letter ascribed to Clement, but we have not the sameknowledgeof its recognition aswe have οfthe former,for we do not even know if the primitive writers used it.
 some have also quite recently put forward other verbose and long treatises, purporting to be Clement's, containing dialogues with Ρeter and Apion,1 but there is absolutely no mention of them among the ancient writers nor do they Ρreserve the purc type οf apostolic orthodoxy.
 XXXIX.
 Thus the recognized writing of Clement is well known and the works of Ignatius and Polycarp havebeen spoken οf,and of Papias five treatises are extant which have also the title of“ Interpretation οf the oracles of the” These are also mentioned by Irenaeus as though his οnly writing, for he says inοne place,““ To thesethings also Ρapias, the hearerof John, who wasa comanion of Ροlycarp andone ofthe ancients,2 bears witnessin writing in the fourthofhis books,for five books were composed by” so says Irenaeus.
 Yet Ρapias himself, according to the preface of his treatises, makes plain that he had in no way beena hearer and eyewitness of the sacred Αpostles, but teaches that he had received the articles of the faith from those who had known them, for he speaks as follows:
“ ΑndI shall not hesitate to append to the interpretationsall thatIever learnt well from the presbytersand remember well, for of their truthI am conndent.
 For unlike mostI did not rejoice in them who say much, but in them whoteach the truth, nor in ἀλλοτρίας ἐντολὰς μνημονεύουσιν, ἀλλὰ τοῖς τὰς παρὰ τοῦ κυρίου τῆ πίστει δεδομένας καὶ ἀπ’ αὐτῆς παραγινομένας τῆς ἀληθείας·
 εἰ δέ που καὶ παρηκολουθηκώς τις τοῖς πρεσβυτέροις ἔλθοι, τοὺς τῶν πρεσβυτέρων ἀνέκρινον λόγους, τί Ἀνδρέας ἢ τί Πέτρος εἶπεν ἢ τί Φίλιππος ἢ τί Θωμᾶς ἢ Ἰάκωβος ἢ τί Ἰωάννης ἢ Ματθαῖος ἤ τις ἕτερος τῶν τοῦ κυρίου μαθητῶν ἅ τε Ἀριστίων καὶ ὁ πρεσβύτερος Ἰωάννης, τοῦ κυρίου μαθηταί, λέγουσιν.
 οὐ γὰρ τὰ ἐκ τῶν βιβλίων τοσοῦτόν με ὠφελεῖν ὑπελάμβανον δάον τὰ παρὰ ζώσης φωνῆς καὶ μενούσης.
” Ἔνθα καὶ ἐπιστῆσαι ἄξιον δὶς καθαρθμιοῦντι αὐτῷ τὸ Ἰωάννου ὄνομα, ὧν τὸν μὲν πρότερον Πέτρῳ καὶ Ἰακώβῳ καὶ Ματθαίῳ καὶ τοῖς λοιποῖς ἀποστόλοις συγκαταλέγει, σαφῶς δηλῶν τὸν εὐαγγελιστήν, τὸν δ’ ἕτερον Ἰωάννην, διαστείλας τὸν λόγον, ἑτέροις παρὰ τὸν τῶν ἀποστόλων ἀριθμὸν κατατάσσει, προτάξας αὐτοῦ τὸν Ἀριστίωνα, σαφῶς τε αὐτὸν πρεσβύτερον ὀνομάζει·
 1 ὡς καὶ διὰ τούτων ἀποδείκνυσθαι τὴν ἱστορίαν ἀληθῆ τῶν δύο κατὰ τὴν Ἀσίαν ὁμωνυμίᾳ κεχρῆσθαι εἰρηκότων δύο τε ἐν Ἐφέσω γενέσθαι μνήματα καὶ ἑκάτερον Ἰωάννου ἔτι νῦν λέγεσθαι·
 οἷς καὶ ἀναγκαῖον προσέχειν τὸν νοῦν, εἰκὸς γὰρ τὸν δεύτερον, εἰ μή τις ἐθέλοι τὸν πρῶτον, τὴν ἐπ’ ὀνόματος φερομένην Ἰωάννου ἀποκάλυψιν ἑορακέναι.
 καὶ ὁ νῦν δὲ ἡμῖν δηλούμενος Παπίας τοὺς μὲν τῶν ἀποατόλων λόγους παρὰ τῶν αὐτοῖς παρηκολουθηκότων ὁμολογεῖ παρειληφέναι, Ἀριστίωνος δὲ καὶ τοῦ πρεαβυτέρου Ἰωάννου αὐτήκοον ἑαυτόν φησι γενέσθαι·
 ὀνομαστὶ γοῦν πολλάκις them who recount the commandmentsοf others,but in themwho repeated those given to the faith by the Lord and derived from truth itself;
 but if ever anyone came who had followed1 the presbyters,I inquired into the wordsofthe presbyters, what Andrew or Ρeter οr Philip or Thomas or James or Johnor Matthew,or any otherοfthe Lord's disciples,had said, and what Aristion andthe Presbyter John, the Ιord’s disciples,were saying.
 ForI did not suppose that information from books would help me so much as the word ofa living and surviving voice.
” It is here worth nothing that he twiee counts the name of John, and reckons the first John with Ρeter and James and Matthew and the other Αpostles, clearly thethe evangelist,but by changing his statement Ρlaces the seeond with the others outside the numberofthe Αpostles,putting Αristion Before him and clearly calling hima presbyter.
 This confirms the truth οf the story of those who have said that there were twp of the same name in Αsia, and that there are two tombs at Εphesus both still called John 's.
 This calls for attention:
 for it is probable that the second( unless anyone prefer the fonner) saw the revelationwhich passes under the name οf John The Papias whom we are now treating confesses that he had received the words of the Αpostles from their followers, but says that he had aetually heard Αristion and the presbyter John.
 Ηe often quotes them by name and gives αὐτῶν μνημονεύσας ἐν τοῖς αὐτοῦ συγγράμμασιν τίθησιν αὐτῶν παραδόαεις.
 καὶ ταῦταδ’ ἡμῖν οὐκ εἰς τὸ ἄχρηστον εἰρήσθω·
 ἄξιον δὲ ταῖς ἀποδοθείσαις τοῦ Παπία φωναῖς προσάψαι λέξεις ἑτέρας αὐτοῦ, δι’ ὧν παράδοξά τινα ἱστορεῖ καὶ ἄλλα ὡς ἂν ἐκ παραδόσεως εἰς αὐτὸν ἐλθόντα.
 τὸ μὲν οὖν κατὰ τὴν‘ Iεράπολιν Φίλιππον τὸν ἀπόστολον ἅμα ταῖς θυγατράσιν διατρῖψαι διὰ τῶν πρόσθεν δεδήλωται·
 ὡς δὲ κατὰ τοὺς αὐτοὺς ὁ Παπίας γενόμενος, διήγησιν παρειληφέναι θαυμασίαν ὑπὸ τῶν τοῦ Φιλίππου θυγατέρων μνημονεύει, τὰ νῦν σημειωτέον·
 νεκροῦ γὰρ ἀνάστασιν κατ’ αὐτὸν γεγονυῖαν ἱστορεῖ καὶ αὖ πάλιν ἕτερον παράδοξον περὶ Ἰοῦστον τὸν ἐπικληθέντα Βαρσαβᾶν γεγονός, ὡς δηλητήριον φάρμακον ἐμπιόντος καὶ μηδὲν ἀηδὲς διὰ τὴν τοῦ κυρίου χάριν ὑπομείναντος.
 τοῦτον δὲ τὸν Ἰοὺστον μετὰ τὴν τοῦ σωτῆρος ἀνάληψιν τοὺς ἱεροὺς ἀποστόλους μετὰ Ματθία στῆσαί τε καὶ ἐπεύξασθαι ἀντὶ τοῦ προδότου Ἰούδα ἐπὶ τὸν κλῆρον τῆς ἀναπληρώσεως τοῦ αὐτῶν ἀριθμοῦ ἡ τῶν Πραξέων ὧδέπως ἱστορεῖ γραφή·
 ““ καὶ ἔστησαν δύο, Ἰωσὴφ τὸν καλούμενον Βαρναβᾶν, ὃς ἐπεκλήθη’ Iοῦατος, καὶ Ματθίαν·
 καὶ προαευξάμενοι εἶπαν. ’
’ καὶ ἄλλα δὲ ὁ αὐτὸς ὡς ἐκ παραδόσεως ἀγράφου εἰς αὐτὸν ἥκοντα παρατέθειται ξένας τέ τινας παραβολὰς τοῦ σωτῆρος καὶ διδασκαλίας αὐτοῦ καί τινα ἄλλα μυθικώτερα·
 ἐν οἷς καὶ χιλιάδα τινά φησιν ἐτῶν ἔσεσθαι μετὰ τὴν ἐκ νεκρῶν ανάστασιν, σωματικῶς τῆς χριστοῦ βασιλείας ἐπὶ ταυτησὶ τῆς γῆς ὑποστησομένης·
 ἃ καὶ ἡγοῦμαι τὰς ἀποστολικὰς παρεκδεξάμενον διηγήσεις ὑπολαβεῖν, their traditions in his writings.
 Let this suffice to good purpose.
 But it is worth while to add to the words of Papias already given other sayings οf his,in which he tells certain marvels and other details which apparently reached him by tradition.
 It has already been mentioned that Philip the Αpostle lived at Ηierapolis with his daughters, but it must now be shown how Ρapias was with them and reeeiveda wonderful story from the daughters of Ρhilip;
 for he relates the resurrection ofa corpse in his time and in another Ρlace another miraele conneeted with Justus surnamed Barsabas, for he drank poiSon but by the Lord 's graee suffered no harm.
 Of this Justus the Αcts relates that the sacred Apostles set him up and prayed over him together with Matthias after the ascension of the Lord for the choice of one to fill up their number in place ofthe traitor Judas,“ and theyset forth two, Joseph called Barsabas, who was called Justus, and Matthias;
 and they prayed and said.
" The sameadduees other accounts, as though they came to him from unwritten tradition, and some strange parables and teachingsof the saviour, and some other more mythical accountS.
 Αmong them he says that there willbea millennium after the resurrection of the dead, when the kingdom of Christ will be set up in material form on this earth.
I suppose that he got these notions bya perverse τὰ ἐν ὑποδείγμασι πρὸς αὐτῶν μυστικῶς εἰρημένα μὴ συνεορακότα.
 σφόδρα γάρ τοι σμικρὸς ὢν τὸν νοῦν, ὡς ἂν ἐκ τῶν αὐτοῦ λόγων τεκμηράμενον εἰπεῖν, φαίνεται, πλὴν καὶ τοῖς μετ’ αὐτὸν πλείστοις ὅσοις τῶν ἐκκλησιαστικῶν τῆς ὁμοίας αὐτῷ δόξης παραίτιος γέγονεν τὴν ἀρχαιότητα τἀνδρὸς προβεβλημένοις, ὥσπερ οὖν Εἰρηναίῳ καὶ εἴ τις ἄλλος τὰ ὅμοια φρονῶν ἀναπέφηνεν.
 Καὶ ἄλλας δὲ τῆ ἰδίᾳ γραφῆ παραδίδωσιν Ἀριστίωνος τοῦ πρόσθεν δεδηλωμένου τῶν τοῦ κυρίου λόγων διηγήσεις καὶ τοῦ πρεσβυτέρου Ἰωάννου παραδόσεις·
 ἐφ’ ἃς τοὺς φιλομαθεῖς ἀναπέμψαντες, ἀναγκαίως νῦν προσθήσομεν ταῖς προεκτεθείσαις αὐτοῦ φωναῖς παράδοσιν ἢν περὶ Μάρκου τοῦ τὸ εὐαγγέλιον γεγραφότος ἐκτέθειται διὰ τούτων·
 ἴ’ καὶ τοῦθ’ ὁ πρεσβύτερος ἔλεγεν·
 Μάρκος μὲν ἑρμηνευτὴς Πέτρου γενόμενος, δάα ἐμνημόνευσεν, ἀκριβῶς ἔγραφεν, οὐ μέντοι τάξει, τὰ ὑπὸ τοῦ κυρίου ἢ λεχθέντα ἢ πραχθέντα.
 οὔτε γὰρ ἤκουσεν τοῦ κυρίου οὔτε παρηκολούθησεν αὐτῷ, ὕστερον δέ, ὡς ἔφην, Πέτρῳ·
 ὃς πρὸς τὰς χρείας ἐποιεῖτο τὰς διδασκαλίας, ἀλλ’ οὐχ ὥσπερ σύνταξιν τῶν κυριακῶν ποιούμενος λογίων, ὥστε οὐδὲν ἥμαρτεν Μάρκος οὕτως ἔνια γραφὰς ὡς ἀπεμνημόνευσεν.
 ἑνὸς γὰρ ἐποιήσατο πρόνοιαν, τοῦ μηδὲν ὧν ἤκουσεν παραλιπεῖν ἢ ψεύσασθαί τι ἐν αὐτοῖς.
 ” ταῦτα μὲν οὖν ἱστόρηται τῷ Παπίᾳ περὶ τοῦ Μάρκου·
 περὶ δὲ τοῦ Ματθαίου ταῦτ’ εἴρηται·
 “ Ματθαῖος μὲν οὖν Ἑβραίδι διαλέκτῳ τὰ λόγια συνετάξατο, ἡρμήνευσεν δ’ αὐτὰ ὡς ἢν δυνατὸς ἕκαστος.
” reading οfthe apostolic aceounts, not realiring that they had spoken mystically and symbolically.
 For he wasa man ofvery little intelligence, as is clear from his books.
 But he is responsible for the fact that so many Christian writers after him held the same opinion, relyingonhis antiquity, for inrtance Irenaeus and whoever else appears to have held the same views.
 In the samewriting he also quotes other interpretations of the words οfthe Lord givenby the Aristion mentioned above and traditions of John the presbyter.
 To them wemay dismiss the studious;
 but we are now obliged to append to the words already quoted from him a tradtion about the Mark whowrotethe Gospel, which he expounds as follows.
“ Αnd the Presbyterusedto say tffihls, Mark became Ρeter’s interpreter and wrote accurately all that he remembered, not, indeed, in order, of the things said or done by the Lord.
 For he had not heardthe Lord,nor had he followed him, but lateron, asI said, followed Ρeter, who used to give teaching as necessity demanded but not making, as it were, an auangement of the Lord's oracles, so that Mark did nothing wrong in thus writing down single Ρoints as he remembered them.
 For to one tHhIng he gave attention, to leave out nothing of what he had heard and to make no false statements in them.
'" This is related by Ρapias about Mark, and about Matthew this was said,“ Matthew collectedthe oracles inthe Ηebrew language, and eaeh interpreted them as best he could.
” Κέχρηται δ’ ὁ αὐτὸς μαρτυρίαις ἀπὸ τῆς Ἰωάννου προτέρας ἐπιστολῆς καὶ ἀπὸ τῆς Πέτρου ὁμοίως, ἐκτέθειται δὲ καὶ ἄλλην ἱστορίαν περὶ γυναικὸς ἐπὶ πολλαῖς ἁμαρτίαις διαβληθείσης ἐπὶ τοῦ κυρίου, ἢν τὸ καθ’ Ἑβραίους εὐαγγέλιον περιέχει.
 καὶ ταῦτα δ’ ἡμῖν ἀναγκαίως πρὸς τοῖς ἐκτεθεῖσιν ἐπιτετηρήσθω.
 The same writer used quotations from the rirrt Epistle οf John,and likewise also from that or Ρeter, and has expounded another Story about a woman who was accused before the Lord of many sins, which the Gospel according to the Ηebrews contains.
 Let this suffice us in addition to the extracts made.
 Δݲ τάδε καὶ ἡ τετάρτη περιέχει βίβλος τῆς Ἐκκλησιαστικῆς ἰατορίας Αݲ Τίνες ἐπὶ τῆς Τραϊανοῦ βασιλείας ῾Ρωμαίων γεγόνασι καὶ Ἀλεξανδρέων ἐπίσκοποι.
 Bݲ Ὁποῖα Ἰουδαῖοι κατ’ αὐτὸν πεπόνθασιν.
 Γݲ Οἱ κατὰ Ἁδριανὸν ὑπὲρ τῆς πίστεως ἀπολογησάμενοι.
 Δݲ Οἱ κατ’ αὐτὸν ῾Ρωμαίων καὶ Ἀλεξανδρέων ἐπίσκοποι.
 Eݲ Οἱ ἀνέκαθεν ἀπὸ τοῦ σωτῆρος καὶ ἐπὶ τοὺς δηλουμένους Ἱεροσολύμων ἐπίσκοποι.
 ςݲ Ἡ κατὰ Ἀδριανὸν ὑστάτη Ἰουδαίων πολιορκία.
 Zݲ Τίνες κατ’ ἐκεῖνο καιροῦ γεγόνασιν ψευδωνύμου γνώσεως ἀρχηγοί.
 Ηݲ Τίνες ἐκκλησιαστικοὶ συγγραφεῖς.
 Θݲ Ἐπιστολὴ Ἁδριανοῦ ὑπὲρ τοῦ μὴ δεῖν ἀκρίτως ἡμᾶς ἐλαύνειν.
 Ιݲ Τίνες ἐπὶ τῆς Ἀντωνίνου βασιλείας ἐπίσκοποι ῾Ρωμαίων καὶ Ἀλεξανδρέων γεγόνασιν.
 ΙݲΑݲ Περὶ τῶν κατ’ αὐτοὺς αἱρεσιαρχῶν.
 ΙݲΒݲ Περὶ τῆς Ἰουατίνου πρὸς Ἀντωνῖνον ἀπολογίας.
 ΙݲΓݲ Ἀντωνίνου πρὸς τὸ κοινὸν τῆς Ἀσίας ἐπιστολὴ περὶ τοῦ καθ’ ἡμᾶς λόγου.
 CΟΝTEΝTS OF BΟΟΚ IV The contentsofthe fourth book of the History of the Church is as follows:
 Ι.
 Who were the bishops of Rome and Alexandria in the reign of Trajan.
 II.
 What the Jewssuffered in his time.
 III.
 The apologistes for Christianity in the time of Ηadrian.
 ΙV.
 The bishops of Rome and Alexandria in his time.
 V.
 The bishops of Jerusalem, beginning from the Saviour down to the time mentioned.
 VI.
 The last siege of the Jews under Hadrian.
 VII.
 Who were the leadersof knowlege, falsely so- called, at that rime.
 VIII.
 Who are the writers fo the church.
 IX.
 Αletter of Hadrian to the effect that we must not be persecuted without being tried.
 X.
 Who were thc bishops of Rome and Alexandria in the reign of Antoninus.
 XI.
 Oh the leaders οf heresy in their times.
 XII.
 On the apology of Justin to Antoninus.
 XIII.
 Α letter of Antoninustothe Council of Asia On Our religion.
 ΙΔݲ Τὰ περὶ Πολυκάρπου τοῦ τῶν ἀποστόλων γνωρίμου μνημονευόμενα.
 ΙΕݲ Ὅπως κατὰ Οὐῆρον ὁ Πολύκαρπος ἅμ’ ἑτέροις ἐμαρτύρησεν ἐπὶ τῆς Σμυρναίων πόλεως.
 Ις ὅπως Ἰουστῖνος ὁ φιλόσοφος τὸν χριστοῦ λόγον ἐπὶ τῆς‘ Ρωμαίων πόλεως πρεσβεύων εμαρτυρησεν.
 ΙΖݲ Περὶ ὧν Ἰουστῖνος ἐν ἰδίῳ συγγράμματι μνημονεύει μαρτύρων.
 IHݲ τίνες εἰς ἡμᾶς ἦλθον τῶν Ἰουστίνου λόγων.
 ΙΘ τίνες ἐπὶ τῆς Οὐήρου βασιλείας τῆς ‘ Ρωμαίων καὶ’ ΑΑεξανδρέων ἐκκλησίας προέστησαν.
 Kݲ τίνες οἱ τῆς Ἀντιοχέων.
 ΚΑݲ Περὶ τῶν κατὰ τούτους διαλαμψάντων ἐκκλησιαστικῶν συγγραφέων.
 KBݲ Περὶ κτησίππου καὶ ὧν αὐτὸς μνημονεύει.
 ΚΓݲ Περὶ Διονυσίου Κορινθίων ἐπισκόπου καὶ ὧν ἔγραφεν ἐπιστολῶν.
 KΔݲ Περὶ Θεοφίλου Ἀντιοχέων ἐπισκόπου.
 KEݲ Περὶ Φιλίππου καὶ Μοδέστου.
 Kςݲ Περὶ Μελίτωνος καὶ ὧν αὐτὸς ἐμνημόνευσεν.
 KZݲ Περὶ Ἀπολιναρίου.
 KH Περὶ Μουσανοῦ.
 KΘ Περὶ τῆς κατὰ Τατιανὸν αἱρέσεως.
Λ Περὶ Βαρδησάνου τοῦ Σύρου καὶ τῶν φερομένων αὐτοῦ λόγων.
 XIV.
 The story of Polycarp who had known the apostle.
 XV.
 How in the time of Verus Polycarp with others was martyred in the cityos Smyrna.
 XVI.
 How Justin the philosopher was martyred in the city of Rome as an ambassador for the word of Christ.
 XVII.
 On the martyrs whom Justin mentions in his own writings.
 XVIII.
 What writings of Justin have come down to us.
 XIX.
 Who were the leaders of the churcbes of Rome and Alexandria in the reign of Verus.
 XX.
 Who were the bishopsOf Antioch.
 XXI.
 Οn tbe ecclesiasticalwriterswho were famousin their time.
 XXII.
 On Hegesippus and vbat he relates.
 XXIII.
 Οn Dionysius, the bishop of Corinth, and the letters which he wrote.
 XXIV.
 Οn Theophilus, hishop of Antioch.
 XXV.
 Οn Philip and Modestus.
 XXVI.
 Οn Melito andthe statements whichhe makes.
 XXVII.
 Οn Apolinarius.
 XXVIII.
 On Musanus.
 XXIX.
 Οn the heresy of Tatian.
 XXX.
 Οn Bardesanes the Syrian and his extant books.
 Ι.
 Ἄμφι δὲ τὸ δωδέκατον ἔτος τῆς Τραϊανοῦ βασιλείας ὁ μικρῷ πρόσθεν ἡμῖν τῆς ἐν Ἀλεξανδρείᾳ παροικίας δηλωθεὶς ἐπίσκοπος τὴν ζωὴν μεταλλάττει, τέταρτος δ’ ἀπὸ τῶν ἀποστόλων τὴν τῶν αὐτόθι λειτουργίαν κληροῦται Πρῖμος.
 ἐν τούτῳ καὶ Ἀλέξανδρος ἐπὶ Ῥώμης, ὄγδοον ἔτος ἀποπλήσαντος Εὐαρέστου, πέμπτην ἀπὸ Πέτρου καὶ Παύλου κατάγων διαδοχήν, τὴν ἐπισκοπὴν ὑπολαμβάνει.
 II.
 καὶ τὰ μὲν τῆς τοῦ σωτῆρος ἡμῶν διδασκαλίας τε καὶ ἐκκλησίας ὁσημέραι ἀνθοῦντα ἐπὶ μεῖξον ἐχώρει προκοπῆς, τὰ δὲ τῆς Ἰουδαίων συμφθρᾶς ἐπαλλήλοις ἤκμαζεν.
 ἤδη γοῦν τοῦ αὐτοκράτορος εἰς ἐνιαυτὸν ὀκτωκαιδέκατον ἐλαύνοντος, αὖθις Ἰουδαίων κίνησις ἐπαναστᾶσα πάμπολυ πλῆθος αὐτῶν διαφθείρει.
 ἔν τε γὰρ Ἀλεξανδρείᾳ ἀνδρείῳ καὶ τῆ λοιπῇ Αἰγύπτῳ καὶ προσέτι κατὰ Κυρήνην, ὥσπερ ὑπὸ πνεύματος δεινοῦ τινος καὶ στασιώδους ἀναρριπισθέντες, ὥρμηντο πρὸς τοὺς συνοίκους Ἕλληνας στασιάζειν, αὐξήσαντές τε εἰς μέγα τὴν στάσιν, τῷ ἐπιόντι ἐνιαυτῷ πόλεμον οὐ σμικρὸν συνῆψαν, ἡγουμένου τηνικαῦτα Λούπου τῆς ἁπάσης Αἰγύπτου.
 καὶ δὴ ἐν τῇ πρώτη συμβολῇ βολῇ ἐπικρατῆσαι αὐτοὺς συνέβη τῶν Ἑλλήνων·
 BOOK IVI.
 ABOUT the tweKthy ear of the reign of Trajan1the bishop 2of the ffioceseof Alexandria,whom we men- tionedalittle earlier, passed away, and Primus, the fourthfrom the Apostles, received the charge of those in that place.
 Αt this time, too,at Rome Alexander, when Evarestus had completed his eighth year, was the Rfth to succeed Feterand Paul,and took upthe bishopric.
 II.
 While the teaching of our Saviour and the church were nourishing daily and moving on to further progress the tragedy of the Jews was reaching the climax of successive woes.
 Ιn the course of the eighteenth year3 οf the reign of the Emperorarebellionof the Jews again broke out and destroyeda great multitudeof them.
 For both in Alexandria and in the rest of Egypt andespeciallyin Cyrene,as though they had been seized by some terrible spirit of rebellion, they rushed into sedition against their Greek fellow clblens, and increasing the seope of the rebellion in the following year starteda great war while Lupus was governor of all Egypt.
 4 In the nrst engagement they happened to overcome οἳ καὶ καταφυγόντες εἰς τὴν Ἀλεξάνδρειαν τοὺς ἐν τῆ πόλει Ἰουδαίους ἐζώγρησάν τε καὶ ἀπέκτειναν, τῆς δὲ παρὰ τούτων συμμαχίας ἀποτυχόντες οἱ κατὰ Κυρήνην τὴν χώραν τῆς Αἰγύπτου λεηλατοῦντες καὶ τοὺς ἐν αὐτῇ νομοὺς φθείροντες διετέλουν, ἡγουμένου αὐτῶν Λουκούα·
 ἐφ’ οὓς ὁ αὐτοκράτωρ ἔπεμψεν Μάρκιον Τούρβωνα σὺν δυνάμει πεζῇ τε καὶ ναυτικῇ, ἔτι δὲ καὶ ἱππικῇ.
 ὁ δὲ πολλαῖς μάχαις οὐκ ὀλίγῳ τε χρόνῳ τὸν πρὸς αὐτοὺς διαπονήσας πόλεμον, πολλὰς μυριάδας Ἰουδαίων, οὐ μόνον τῶν ἀπὸ Κυρήνης, ἀλλὰ καὶ τῶν ἀπ’ Αἰγύπτου συναιρομένων Λουκούᾳ τῷ βασιλεῖ αὐτῶν, ἀναιρεῖ.
 ὁ δὲ αὐτοκράτωρ ὑποπτεύσας καὶ τοὺς ἐν Μεσοποταμίᾳ Ἰουδαίους ἐπιθήσεσθαι τοῖς αὐτόθι, Λουσίῳ Κυήτῳ προσέταξεν ἐκκαθᾶραι τῆς ἐπαρχίας αὐτούς·
 ὃς καὶ παραταξάμενος, πάμπολυ πλῆθος τῶν αὐτόθι φονεύει, ἐφ’ ᾧ κατορθώματι Ἰουδαίας ἡγεμὼν ὑπὸ τοῦ αὐτοκράτορος ἀνεδείχθη.
 ταῦτα καὶ Ἑλλήνων οἱ τὰ κατὰ τοὺς αὐτοὺς χρόνους γραφῆ παραδόντες αὐτοῖς ἱστόρησαν ῥήμασιν.
 ΙΙΙ.
 Τραϊανοῦ δὲ ἐφ’ ὅλοις ἔτεσιν εἴκοσι τὴν ἀρχὴν μησὶν ἓξ δέουσιν κρατήσαντος, Αἴλιος Ἁδριανὸς διαδέχεται τὴν ἡγεμονίαν.
 τούτῳ Κοδράτος λόγον προσφωνήσας ἀναδίδωσιν, ἀπολογίαν συντάξας ὑπὲρ τῆς καθ’ ἡμᾶς θεοσεβείας, ὅτι δή τινες πονηροὶ ἄνδρες τοὺς ἡμετέρους ἐνοχλεῖν ἐπειρῶντο·
 εἰς ἔτι δὲ φέρεται παρὰ πλείστοις τῶν ἀδελφῶν, ἀτὰρ καὶ παρ’ ἡμῖν τὸ σύγγραμμα·
 ἐξ οὗ κατιδεῖν ἔστιν λαμπρὰ τεκμήρια τῆς τε τοῦ ἀνδρὸς διανοίας καὶ τῆς ἀποστολικῆς ὀρθοτομίας.
 ὁ δ’ αὐτὸς τὴν καθ’ ἑαυτὸν ἀρχαιότητα παραφαίνει δι’ ὧν ἱστορεῖthe Greeks,who fledto Alexandria and capturedand killed the Jewsinthe city, but though thus losing the help of the townsmen, the Jewsof Cyrene continuedto plunder the country of Egypt and to ravage the districts in it under their leader Lucuas.
 The Emperor sent against them Marcius Turbo with land and sea forces including eavalry.
 Ηe waged war vigorously against them in many bartleS fora considerable time and killed many thousandsof Jews, not οnly those of Cyrene but alSo those of Εgypt who had rallied to Lucuas, 1 their king.
 The Εmperor suspected that the Jewsin Mesopotamia wollld also attack the inhabitants and ordered Lusius Quietus to clean them out of the province.
 Ηe organizeda force and murdereda great multitudeofthe Jews there, and for this reform was appointed governor of Judaea by the Εmperοr.
 The Greek authors2 who chronicle the same period have related this narrative in these very words.
 III.
 When Trajan had reigned for nineteen anda half years Aelius Hadrian succeeded 3 to the sovereignty To him Quadratus addresseda treatise,composing a defence for our religion because some wicked men were trying to trouble the Christians.
 It is still extant among many of the brethrenandwe havea copy ourselves.
 From it can be seen the clear proof οf his intellect and apostle orthodoxy.
 Ηe shows his early date by what he says as follows ταῦτα ἰδίαις φωναῖς·
 “ τοῦ δὲ σωτῆρος ἡμῶν τὰ ἔργα ἀεὶ παρῆν ἀληθῆ γὰρ ἢν, οἱ θεραπευθέντες, οἱ ἀναστάντες ἐκ νεκρῶν, οἳ οὐκ ὤφθησαν μόνον θεραπευόμενοι καὶ ἀνιστάμενοι, ἀλλὰ καὶ ἀεὶ παρόντες, οὐδὲ ἐπιδημοῦντος μόνον τοῦ σωτῆρος, ἀλλὰ καὶ ἀπαλλαγέντος ἦσαν ἐπὶ χρόνον ἱκανόν, ὥστε καὶ εἰς τοὺς ἡμετέρους χρόνους τινὲς αὐτῶν ἀφίκοντο.
 ” 1 τοιοῦτος μὲν οὗτος·
 καὶ Ἀριστείδης δέ, πιστὸς ἀνὴρ τῆς καθ’ ἡμᾶς ὁρμώμενος εὐσεβείας, τῷ Κοδράτῳ παραπλησίως ὑπὲρ τῆς πίστεως ἀπολογίαν ἐπιφωνήσας Ἀδριανῷ καταλέλοιπεν·
 σῴζεται δέ γε εἰς δεῦρο παρὰ πλείστοις καὶ ἡ τούτου γραφή.
 IV.
 Ἔτει δὲ τρίτῳ τῆς αὐτῆς ἡγεμονίας Ἀλέξανδρος ἀνδρὸς‘ Ρωμαίων ἐπίσκοπος τελευτᾷ, δέκατον τῆς οἰκονομίας ἀποπλήσας ἔτος·
 Ξύστος ἢν τούτῳ διάδοχος.
 καὶ τῆς Ἀλεξανδρέων δὲ παροικίας ἀμφὶ τὸν αὐτὸν χρόνον Πρῖμον μεταλλάξαντα δωδεκάτῳ τῆς προστασίας ἔτει διαδέχεται Ἰοῦστος.
 v.
 Τῶν γε μὴν ἐν Ἱερροσολύμοις ἐπισκόπων τοὺς χρόνους γραφῆ σῳζομένους οὐδαμῶς εὑρών κομιδῆ γὰρ οὗν βραχυβίους αὐτοὺς λόγος κατέχει γενέσθαι), τοσοῦτον ἐξ ἐγγράφων παρείληφα, ὡς μέχρι τῆς κατὰ Ἀδριανὸν Ἰουδαίων πολιορκίας πεντεκαίδεκα τὸν ἀριθμὸν αὐτόθι γεγόνασιν ἐπισκόπων διαδοχαί, οἃς πάντας Ἑβραίους φασὶν ὄντας ἀνέκαθεν, τὴν γνῶσιν τοῦ χριστοῦ γνησίως καταδέξασθαι, ὤατ’ ἤδη πρὸς τῶν τὰ τοιάδε ἐπικρίνειν δυνατῶν καὶ τῆς τῶν ἐπισκόπων λειτουργίας ἀξίους δοκιμασθῆναι·
 συνεστάναι γὰρ αὐτοῖς τότε τὴν πᾶσαν ἐκκλησίαν ἐξ Ἑβραίων πιστῶν ἀπὸ τῶν ἀπο- in hisown words:
“ But the works ofour sariour werc always present, for they were true, those who were cured, those who rose fromthe dead, who not merely appeared as cured and risen, but were constantly present, not only wffihlle the sariour was living, but evenforsome time afterhehad gone, so that some of them surrived even till our own” such was he.
 Aristides too,a man of faith and devotedtoour religion, has, hke Quadratus, left behinda defence of the faithaddressedto Hadrian.
 His writing, too, is still preserved hy many.
 1 IV.
 In the tffihlrd year οf the samereign2 Alexander,the bishop of the Romans, ffied after eompleting the tenth year of his ministry;
 Xystus was his successor.
 Αnd at the same time, in the dioceseofthe Alexandrians,Justus succeeded Primus, who diedin the twelfth yearof his rule.
 v.
 1 have not found any written statement of the dates of the bishops in Jerusalem, for tradition says that they were extremely short- lived, but1 have gathered from documents this much— that uptothe siege of the Jews by Ηadrian the successions οf bishops were fifteen in number.
 It is said that they were all Ηebrews by origin who had nobly accepted the knowledge of Christ, so that they were counted worthy even of the episcopal ministry by those who had the power to judge such questions.
 For their whole church at that time consisted of Ηebrews who στόλων καὶ εἰς τὴν τότε διαρκεσάντων πολιορκίαν, καθ’ ἢν Ἰουδαῖοι Ῥωμαίων αὖθις ἀποστάντες, οὐ μικροῖς πολέμοις ἥλωσαν.
 διαλελοιπότων δ’ οὖν τηνικαῦτα τῶν ἐκ περιτομῆς ἐπισκόπων, τοὺς ἀπὸ πρώτου νῦν ἀναγκαῖον ἂν εἴη καταλέξαι.
 πρῶτος τοιγαροῦν Ἰάκωβος ὁ τοῦ κυρίου λεγόμενος ἀδελφὸς ἦν·
 μεθ’ ὃν δεύτερος Συμεώμ·
 τρίτος Ἰοῦστος·
 Ζακχαῖος τέταρτος·
 πέμπτος Τωβίας·
 ἕκτος Βενιαμίν·
 Ἰωάννης ἕβδομος·
 ὄγδοος Ματθίας·
 ἔνατος Φίλιππος·
 δέκατος Ζενέκας·
 ἑνδέκατος Ιοῦστος·
 Λευὶς δωδέκατος·
 Έφρῆς τρισκαιδέκατος·
 τεσσαρεσκαιδέκατος Ἰωσήφ·
 ἐπὶ πᾶσι πεντεκαιδέκατος Ἰούδας.
 τοσοῦτοι καὶ οἱ ἐπὶ τῆς Ἱεροσολύμων πόλεως ἐπίσκοποι ἀπὸ τῶν ἀποστόλων εἰς τὸν δηλούμενον διαγενόμενοι χρόνον, οἱ πάντες ἐκ περιτομῆς.
 ἤδη δὲ δωδέκατον ἐχούσης ἔτος τῆς ἡγεμονίας, Ξύστον δεκαέτη χρόνον ἀποπλήσαντα ἐπὶ τῆς ‘ Ρωμαίων ἐπισκοπῆς ἕβδομος ἀπὸ τῶν ἀποστόλων διαδέχεται Τελεσφόρος·
 ἐνιαυτοῦ δὲ μεταξὺ καὶ μηνῶν διαγενομένου, τῆς Ἀλεξανδρέων παροικίας τὴν προστασίαν Εὐμένης ἕκτῳ κλήρῳ διαδέχεται, τοῦ πρὸ αὐτοῦ ἔτεσιν ἕνδεκα διαρκέσαντος.
 VI.
 καὶ δῆτα τῆς Ἰουδαίων ἀποστασίας αὖθις εἰς μέγα καὶ πολὺ προελθούσης, Ῥοῦφος ἐπάρχων τῆς Ἰουδαίας, στρατιωτικῆς αὐτῷ συμμαχίας ὑπὸ βασιλέως πεμφθείσης, ταῖς ἀπονοίαις αὐτῶν ἀφειδῶς χρώμενος ἐπεξῄει, μυριάδας ἀθρόως ἀνδρῶν ὁμοῦ καὶ παίδων καὶ γυναικῶν διαφθείρων πολέμου τε νόμῳ τὰς χώρας αὐτῶν ἐξανδραποδιζόμενος.
 ἐστρατήγει δὲ τότε Ἰουδαίων Βαρχωχεβας ὄνομα, ὃ δὴ ἀστέρα δηλοῖ, τὰ μὲν ὤα had continued Christian from the Apostles down to the siege at the time when the Jews again rebelled from the Romans and were beaten in ina great war.
 since the Jewiril bishops then ceased, it is now necessarytogive their names from the beginning.
 The first then was James who was called the Lord's brother, arld after him Simeon was the second.
 The third was Justus, Zacchaeus wasthe fourth,Tobias the fifth,the sixth Benjamin,the seventh John,the eighth Mattias,the ninth Philip,the telrth Seneca,the eleventh Justus,the twelfth Levi,the thirteenth Ephres,the fourteenth Joseph, and last of all the fifteenth Judas.
 such were the bishops in tbe crty of Jerusalem, from the Apostles down to the time mentioned, and riley were all Jews.
 now during the Llvelfth year of thereignof Hadrian, Telesphorus,the Seventh from the Apostles, suceeeded Xystus who had completed ten years in the bishopric of the Romalns, and one year and some months later Eumemes suceeeded to the governmentoftbe diocese or Alexandriaasthe sixth bishop, when his predecessor had completed eleven years.
 VI.
 The rebellion of the Jews 1 once more progressed in character and extent, and Rufus, the governorof Judaea,when military aid had been sent him by the Emperor, moved out against them, treating their madness without mercy.
 He destroyed in heaps thousandsof men, women, and children, and, under thelaw of war, enslaved their land.
 The Jews were at rilat time led by a certain Bar Chochebas, 2 which means“ star,” a man who was φονικὸς καὶ λῃστρικός τις ἀνήρ, ἐπὶ δὲ τῇ προσηγορίᾳ, ἐπ’ ἀνδραπόδων, ὡς δὴ ἐξ οὐρανοῦ φωστὴρ αὐτοῖς κατεληλυθὼς κακουμένοις τε ἐπιλάμψαι τερατευόμενος.
 ἀκμάσαντος δὲ τοῦ πολέμου ἔτους ὀκτωκαιδεκάτου τῆς ᾑγεμονίας κατὰ Βηθθηρα πολίχνη τις ἢν ὀχυρωτάτη, τῶν Ἱεροσολύμων οὐ σφόδρα πόρρω διεστῶσα) τῆς τε ἔξωθεν πολιορκίας χρονίου γενομένης λμιῷ τε καὶ δίψει τῶν νεωτεροποιῶν εἰς ἔσχατον ὀλέθρου περιελαθέντων καὶ τοῦ τῆς ἀπονοίας αὐτοῖς αἰτίου τὴν ἀξίαν ἐκτίσαντος δίκην, τὸ πᾶν ἔθνος ἐξ ἐκείνου καὶ τῆς περὶ τὰ Ἱεροσόλυμα γῆς πάμπαν ἐπιβαίνειν εἴργεται νόμου δόγματι καὶ διατάξεσιν Ἀδριανοῦ, ὡς ἂν μηδ’ ἐξ ἀπόπτου θεωροῖει΄ τὸ πατρῷον ἔδαφος, ἐγκελευσαμένου·
 Ἀρίστα’ ν ὁ Πέλλαιος ἱστορεῖ.
 οὕτω δὴ τῆς πόλεως εἰς ἐρημίαν τοῦ Ἰουδαίων ἔθνους παντελῆ τε ἅν τῶν πάλαι οἰκητόρων ἐλθούσης ἐξ ἀλλοφύλου τε γένους συνοικισθείσης, ἡ μετέπειτα μετέπειτα συστᾶσα Ῥωμαϊκὴ πόλις τὴν ἐπωνυμίαν ἀμείψασα, εἰς τὴν τοῦ κρατοῦντος Αἰλίου Αδριανοῦ τιμὴν Αἰλία προσαγορεύεται.
 καὶ δὴ τῆς αὐτόθι ἐκκληοτίας ἐξ ἐθνῶν συγκροτηθείσης, πρῶτος μετὰ τοὺς ἐκ περ·
 τομῆς ἐπισκόπους τὴν τῶν ἐκεῖσε λειτουργίαν ἐγχειρίζεται Μάρκος.
 VII.
 Ἤδη δὲ λαμπροτάτων δίκην φωστήρων τῶνl ἀνὰ τὴν οἰκουμένην ἀποστιλβουσῶν ἐκκλησιῶν ἀκμαζούσης τε εἰς ἅπαν τὸ τῶν ἀνθρώπων γένος τῆς εἰς τὸν σωτῆρα καὶ κύριον ἡμῶν Ἰησοῦν Χριστὸν πίστεως, ὁ μισόκαΛος δαίμων οἷα τῆς ἀληθείας ἐχθρὸς καὶ τῆς τῶν ἀνθρώπων σωτηρίας ἀεὶ τυγχάνων πολεμιώτατος, πάσας στρεφων κατὰ murderousanda bandit,but reliedonhis name, as ifdealing with slaves, and claimed to bea luminary who had come down to them from heaven and was magically enligbtening those who were in misery.
 The War reaehed itS height in the eighteenth year of the reign ofHadrianin Beththera,1 which wasa strong eitadel not very rar from Jerusalem;
 the siege lasteda long time before the rebels were driven to final destruction by famine and thirst and the instigator of their madness paid the penalty he deserved.
 Hadrian then commanded that by a legal decree and ordinances the whole nation should be absolutely prevented from entering from theneeforth even the distriet round Jerusalem, So that not eVen froma distance couhl lt see it ancestral home.
 Ariston of Pella tells the story.
 2 Thus when the city came to be bereft of the natlonof the Jews, and its ancient inhabitants had completely perished, it was colonized by foreigners, and the Roman city which afterwards arose changed its name, and in honour of the reigning emperor Αelius Hadrian was ealled Aelia.
 The chureh, too, in itwascomposed of Gentiles, and after the Jewish bishops the first who was appointed to minister to those there was Marcus.
 VII.
 Like brilliant lamps the churches were noW shining throughoutthe World,and Faith in our saViour and Lord Jesus Christ was flourishing among all mankind, when the devil who hates what is good, as theenemy of truth, ever most hostile to man's salvation, turned all his devices against the church.
 τῆς ἐκκλησίας μηχανάς, πάλαι μὲν τοῖς ἔξωθεν διωγμοῖς κατ’ αὐτῆς ὡπλίζετο, τότε γε μὴν τούτων ἀποκεκλεισμενος, πονηροῖς καὶ γόησιν ἀνδράσιν ὥσπερ τισὶν ὀλεθρίοις ψυχῶν ὀργάνοις διακόνοις τε ἀπωλείας χρώμενος, ἑτέραις κατεστρατήηει πάντα πόρον ἐπινοῶν, ὡς ἂν ὑποδύντες γόητες καὶ ἀπατηλοὶ τὴν αὐτὴν τοῦ δόγματος ἡμῖν προσηγορίαν, ὁμοῦ μὲν τῶν πιστῶν τοὺς πρὸς αὐτῶν ἁλισκομένους εἰς βυθὸν ἀπωλείας ἄγοιεν, ὁμοῦ δὲ τοὺς τῆς πίστεως ἀγνῶτας δι’ ὧν αὐτοὶ δρῶντες ἐπιχειροῖεν, ἀποτρέποιντο τῆς ἐπὶ τὸν σωτήριον λόγον παρόδου.
 ἀπὸ γοῦν τοῦ5 Μενάνδρου, ἃν διάδοχον τοῦ Σίμωνος ἤδη πρότερον παραδεδώκαμεν, ἀμφίστομος ὥσπερ καὶ δικέφαλος ὀφιώδης τις προελθοῦσα δύναμις δυεῖν αἱρέσεων διαφόρων ἀρχηγοὺς κατεστήσατο, Σατορνῖνόν τε Ἀντιοχέα τὸ γένος καὶ Βασιλείδην Ἀλεξανδρέα·
 ὧν ὁ μὲν κατὰ Συρίαν, ὁ δὲ κατ’ Αἴγυπτον συνεστήσαντο θεομισῶν αἱρέσεων διδασκαλεῖα.
 τὰ μὲν οὗν πλεῖστα τὸν Σατορνῖνον τὰ αὐτὰ τῷ Μενάνδρῳ ψευδολογῆσαι ὁ Εἰρήναιος δηλοῖ, προσχήματι δὲ ἀπορρητοτέρων τὸν βασιλείδην εἰς τὸ ἄπειρον τεῖναι τὰς ἐπινοίας, δυσσεβοῦς αἱρέσεως ἑαυτῷ τερατώδεις ἀναπλάσαντα μυθοποιίας.
 πλείστων οὖν ἐκκλησιαστικῶν ἀνδρῶν κατ’ ἐκεῖνο καιροῦ τῆς ἀληθείας ὑπεραγωνιζομένων λογικώτερόν τε τῆς ἀποστολικῆς καὶ ἐκκλησιαστικῆς δόξης ὑπερμαχούντων, ἤδη τινὲς καὶ διὰ συγγραμμάτων τοῖς μετέπειτα προφυλακτικὰς αὐτῶν δὴ τούτων τῶν δηλωθεισῶν αἰρέσεων παρεῖχον ἐφόδους·
 ὧν εἰς ἡμᾶς κατῆλθεν ἐν τοῖς τότε γνωριμωτάτου συγγραφέως Κάστορος ἱκανώτατος κατὰ Formerly he had used persecutions from without as his weapon against her, but now that he was excluded from this he employed wicked men and sorcerers, like baleful weapons and ministers of destruction against the soul, and eonducted his campaign by other plotting by every means that sorcerers and deeeivers might assume the same name as our religion and at οne time lead to the depth of destruction those οf the faithful whom they caught, and at others, by the deeds whieh thev undertook, might turn away from the path to the saving word those who were ignorant of the faith.
 Thus from Menander, whom we have already mentioned as the successor οf Simon, there proceededa certain snakelike power with two mouths and double head, and established the leaders of two heresies, Saturninus, an Antionchian by race, and Basilidesof Αlexandria.
 The first established schools of impious heresy syria, the latter in Εgypt.
 Irenaeus makes it plain that Saturninus uttered for the most part the same falsehoodsas Menander,but Basilides, under the pretext of secret doctrine, Stretehed fancy infinitely far, fabricating monstrous mythS for his impious heresy.
 Now while mort of the orthodoxat that time were struggling forthe truth,and fighting with great eloquence 1 for the glory of the Apostles and of the Church, some alsoby their writings provided for their successors methods of defence against the heresies which have been mentioned.
 Of thesea most powerful refutation of Basilideshas reached us from Agrippa Castor,a most famous Βασιλείδου ἔλεγχος, τὴν δεινότητα τῆς τἀνδρὸς’ ς ἀποκαλύπτων γοητείας.
 ἐκφαίνων δ’ οὖν αὐτοῦ τὰ ἀπόρρητα, φησὶν αὐτὸν εἰς μὲν τὸ εὐαγγέλιον τέσσαρα πρὸς τοῖς εἴκοσι συντάξαι βιβλία, προδήτας δὲ ἑαυτῷ ὀνομάσαι Βαρκαββαν καὶ Βαρκωφ καὶ ἄλλους ἀνυπάρκτους τινὰς ἑαυτῷ συστησάμενον, βαρβάρους τε αὐτοῖς εἰς κατάπληξιν τῶν τὰ τοιαῦτα τεθηπότων ἐπιφημίσαι προσηγορίας, διδάσκειν τε ἀδιαφορεῖν εἰδωλοθύτων ἀπογευομένους καὶ ἐξομνυμένους ἀπαραφυλάκτως τὴν πίστιν κατὰ τοὺς τῶν διωγμῶν καιρούς, Πυθαγορικῶς τε τοῖς προσιοῦσιν αὐτῷ πενταέτη σιωπὴν παρακελεύεσθαι·
 καὶ ἕτερα δὲ τούτοις παραπλήσια ἀμφὶ τοῦ Βασιλείδου καταλέξας ὁ εἰρημένος οὐκ ἀγεννῶς τῆς δηλωθείσης αἱρέσεως εἰς προῦπτον ἐφώρασε τὴν πλάνην.
 γράφει δὲ καὶ Εἰρήναιος συγχρονίσαι τούτοις Καρποκράτην, ἑτέρας αἱρέσεως τῆς τῶν Γνωστικῶν ἐπικληθείσης πατέρα·
 οἱ καὶ τοῦ Σίμωνος οὐχ ὡς ἐκεῖνος κρύβδην, ἀλλ’ ἤδη καὶ εἰς φανερὸν τὰς μαγείας παραδιδόναι ἠξίουν, ὡς ἐπὶ μεγάλοις δή, μόνον οὐχὶ καὶ σεμνυνόμενοι τοῖς κατὰ περιεργίαν πρὸς αὐτῶν ἐπιτελουμένοις φίλτροις ὀνειροπομποῖς τε καὶ παρέδροις τισὶ δαίμοσιν καὶ ἄλλαις ὁμοιοτρόποις τισὶν ἀγωγαῖς·
 τούτοις τε ἀκολούθως πάντα δρᾶν χρῆναι διδάσκειν τὰ αἰσχρουργότατα τοὺς μέλλοντας εἰς τὸ τέλειον τῆς κατ’ αὐτοὺς μυσταγωγίας ἢ καὶ μᾶλλον μυσαροπιίας ἐλεύσεσθαι, ὡς μὴ ἂν ἄλλως ἐκφευξομένους μένους τοὺς κοσμικούς, ὡς ἂν ἐκεῖνοι φαῖεν, ἄρχοντας, μὴ οὐχὶ πᾶσιν τὰ δι’ ἀρρητοποιίας ἀπονείμαντας χρέα.
 τούτοις δῆτα συνέβαινεν διακόνοις χρώμενον τὸν ἐπιχαιρεσίκακον δαίμονα τοὺς μὲν πρὸς αὐτῶν writer of that time, revealing the cleverness of the man's deception.
 Ιn expounding his mysteries he SayS that he compiled twenty- four bookson the gospel,and that he named hisown prophets Bar Cabbas and Bar Coph, 1 and that he set up some others for himself vho bad never existed, but that he invented barbarous names for them to astonish those who vere inriuenced by such things.
 Ηe taught that there vas no harm in eating things offered to idols, or in light- heartedly denying the faith in times of persecution.
 Like Pythagoras he enjoined those who came to him to keep silence for five years.
 The same writer tells other similar things about Basilides, and offersa magnificent refutation of the error of the heresy described.
 Irenaeus also writes that Carpocrates wasa contemporary of these,the father of another herey which was called thatofthe Gnoistics.
 These did not, like Barilides, derire to transmit the magie of Simon secreriy but Openly,a though it was some great thing, speaking almost with awe of their magieal ceremonies, of love charms, of the bringers of dreamsand familiar spirits, and of other similar performances.
 In accordance wtih this they teach that those who purpose coming to initiation in their mysteries, or ratberin their obscenities, must perform all the shocking deeds beeause in no other way can they escape the“ rulers of the” as they would say, except by fulfilling to all of them what was necessary through their mysteries.
 By using these ministers the demon who rejoices in evil accomplished the piteous enslavement ἀπατωμένους οἰκτρῶς οὕτως εἰς ἀπώλειαν ἀνδραποδίζεσθαι, τοῖς δ’ ἀπίστοις ἔθνεσιν πολλὴν παρέχειν κατὰ τοῦ θείου λόγου δυσφημίας περιουσίαν, τῆς ἐξ αὐτῶν φήμης εἰς τὴν τοῦ παντὸς χριστιανῶν ἔθνους διαβολὴν καταχεομένης.
 ταύτῃ δ’ οὖν ἐπὶ πλεῖστον συνέβαινεν τὴν περὶ ἡμῶν παρὰ τοῖς τότε ἀπίστοις ὑπόνοιαν δυσαφῆ καὶ ἀτοπωτάτην διαδίδοσθαι, ὡς δὴ ἀθεμίτοις πρὸς μητέρας καὶ ἀδελφὰς μίξεσιν ἀνοσίαις τε τροφαῖς χρωμένων.
 οὐκ εἰς μακρόν γε μὴν αὐτῷ ταῦτα προυχώρει, τῆς ἀληθείας αὐτῆς ἑαυτὴν συνιστώσης ἐπὶ μέγα τε φῶς κατὰ τὸν προιόντα χρόνον διαλαμπούσης.
 ἔσβεστο μὲν γὰρ αὐτίκα πρὸς αὐτῆς ἐνεργείας ἀπελεγχόμενα τὰ τῶν ἐχθρῶν ἐπιτεχνήματα, ἄλλων ἐπ’ ἄλλαις αἱρέσεων καινοτομουμένων ὑπορρεουσῶν ἀεὶ τῶν προτέρων καὶ εἰς πολυτρόπους καὶ πολυμόρφους ἰδέας ἄλλοτε ἄλλως φθειρομένων·
 προῄει δ’ εἰς αὔξην καὶ μέγεθος, ἀεὶ κατὰ τὰ αὐτὰ καὶ ὡσαύτως ἔχουσα, ἡ τῆς καθόλου καὶ μόνης ἀληθοῦς ἐκκλησίας λαμπρότης, τὸ σεμνὸν καὶ εἰλικρινὲς καὶ ἐλευθέριον τό τε σῶφρον καὶ καθαρὸν τῆς ἐνθέου πολιτείας τε καὶ φιλοσοφίας εἰς ἅπαν γένος Ἑλλήνων τε καὶ βαρβάρων ἀποστίλβουσα.
 συναπέσβη δ’ οὗν ἅμα τῷ χρόνῳ καὶ ἡ κατὰ παντὸς τοῦ δόγματος διαβολή, ἔμενεν δὲ ἄρα μόνη παρὰ πᾶσι κρατοῦσα καὶ ἀν’ ὁμολόγου μένη τὰ μάλιστα διαπρέπειν ἐπὶ σεμνότητι καὶ σωφροσύνη θείοις τε καὶ φιλοσόφοις δόμασιν ἡ καθ’ ἡμᾶς διδασκαλία, ὡς μηδένα τῶν εἰς νῦν αἰσχρὰν ἐπιφέρειν τολμᾶν to perditionofthose who were thusdeceived by them, and brought much weight of discredit uponthe divine word amongthe unbelieving Gentiles, because the report Whieh started from them was scattered calumniously on the whole race Of Christians.
 It was especially in this way that it cametopass thatablasphemous and wicked suspicion concerning us was spread among the heathenof those days, to the effect that we practised unspeakable incest with mothers and sisters and took part in wicked food.
 1 Yet this did not long succeed, for the truth vindicated itself and as time went on shone ever more brighriy.
 For by its power the machinations of its enemie were refuted;
 though new heresies were invented one after another, the earlier ones flowed into strange multiple and multifarious forms and perished in different ways at different times.
 But the brightness of the universal and only true church proceeded to increasein greatness, for it ever held to the same points in the same way, and radiated forth to all the race οf Greeks and barbarians the reVerent, sincere,and free nature, and the sobriety and purity of the divine teaching as to conduct and thought.
 Thus with the lapse of time the calumnies against the whole teaching were extinguished, and our doetrine remained as the only one which had power among all and was admitted to excel inits godliness and sobriety,2 and its divine and wise doctrines.
 So that noonehas daied to κατὰ τῆς πίστεως ἡμῶν δυσφημίαν μηδέ τινα τοιαύτην διαβολὴν οἵαις πάλαι πρότερον φίλον ἢν χρῆσθαι τοῖς καθ’ ἡμῶν ἐπισυνισταμένοις.
 ὅμως δ’ οὖν κατὰ τοὺς δηλουμένους αὖθις παρῆγεν εἰς μέσον ἢ ἀλήθεια πλείους ἑαυτῆς ὑπερμάχους, οὐ δι’ ἀγράφων αὐτὸ μόνον ἐλέγχων, ἀλλὰ καὶ δι’ ἐγγράφων ἀποδείξεων κατὰ τῶν ἀθέων αἱρέσεων στρατευομένους·
 VIII.
 ἐν τούτοις ἐγνωρίζετο Ἡγήσιππος, οὗ πλείσταις ἤδη πρό.
 τερον κεχρήμεθα φωναῖς, ὡς ἂν ἐκ τῆς αὐτοῦ παραδόσεως τινὰ τὼν κατὰ τοὺς ἀποστόλους παραθέμενοι.
 ἐν πέντεδ’ οὖν συγγράμμασιν οὗτος τὴν ἀπλανῆ παράδοσιν τοῦ ἀποστολικοῦ κηρύγματος ἁπλοῦ·
 συντάξει γραφῆς ὑπομνηματισάμενος, καθ’ ὃν ἐγνωρίζετο σημαίνει χρόνον, περὶ τῶν ἀρχῆθεν ἰδρυσάντων τὰ εἴδωλα οὕτω πως γράφων·
“ οἷς κενοτάφια καὶ ναοὺς ἐποίησαν ὡς μέχρι νῦν·
 ὧν ἐστιν καὶ Ἀντίνοος, δοῦλος Ἀδριανοῦ Καίσαρος, οὗ καὶ ἀγὼν ἄγεται Ἀντινόειος, ὁ ἐφ’ ἡμῶν γενόμενος.
 καὶ γὰρ πόλιν ἔκτισεν ἐπώνυμον Ἀντινόου καὶ προφήτας.
” κατ’ αὐτὸν δὲ καὶ Ἰου- στῖνος, γνήσιος τῆς ἀληθοῦς φιλοσοφίας ἐραστής, ἔτι τοῖς παρ’ Ἕλλησιν ἀσκούμενος ἐνδιέτριβεν λόγοις·
 σημαίνει δὲ καὶ αὐτὸς τουτονὶ τὸν χρόνον ἐν τῆ πρὸς Ἀντωνῖνον ἀπολογίᾳ ὧδε γράφων·
“ οὐκ ἄτοπον δὲ ἐπιμνησθῆναι ἐν τούτοις ἡγούμεθα καὶ Ἀντινόου τοῦ νῦν γενομένου, ὃν καὶ ἅπαντες ὡς θεὸν διὰ φόβον σέβειν ὥρμηντο, ἐπιστάμενοι τίς τε ἢν καὶ πόθεν ὑπῆρχεν.
” continuue the base implications of calumny against our faith, such as those who were opposed to us were formerly accustomed to use.
 Nevertheless, at thetime spoken of, the truth again brought forward for itself more champions Who campaigned against the godless heresies not only by unwritten arguments but also in written demonstrations.
 VIII.
 Among these Hegesippus was famous and of his wordswehave already made much use, for from his traffition we have quoted details as to the apostolic age.
 Ηe collected his material1in hve books, giving in the simplest style of writing the unerring tradition of the apostolic preaching.
 Ηe indicates the time in which he flourished by writing thus about those who had made idols:
“ To them theymade cenotaphs andshrines until now, and among them is Antinous,a slave ofthe Emperor Hadrian, in whose honour the Antinoian games are held, though hewas our contemporary.
 For he also built a city called after Antious, and instituted prophets for ” Αt the same time too, Justm;
 a genuine loverof true philosophy, was still continuingto practise the learning of the Greeks.
 And he also himself indicates this period in his Apologyto Antoninus by writing thus,“ And we thought it not out of place to mention at this point Antinous of the present day whom all were intimidated to worship asa god, though they knew his nature and origin.
 ” Ὁ δ᾿ αὐτὸς καὶ τοῦ τότε κατὰ Ἰουδαίων πολέμου μνημονεύων ταῦτα παρατίθεται·
” καὶ γὰρ ἐν τῷ νῦν γενομένῳ Ἰουδαικῷ πολέμῳ Βαρχωχεβας, ὁ τῆς Ἰουδαίων ἀποστάσεως ἀρχηγέτης, Χριστιανοὺς εἰς τιμωρίας δεινάς, εἰ μὴ ἀρνοῖντο Ἰησοῦν τὸν Χριστὸν καὶ βλασφημοῖεν, ἐκέλευεν ἄγσεθαι.
” Ἐν ταὐτῷ δὲ καὶ τὴν ἀπὸ τῆς Ἑλληνικῆς φιλοσοφίας ἐπὶ τὴν θεοσέβειαν μεταβολὴν αὐτοῦ, ὅτι μὴ ἀλόγως, μετὰ κρίσεως δὲ αὐτῷ γεγόνει, δηλῶν, ταῦτα γράφει·
“ καὶ γὰρ αὐτὸς ἐγώ, τοῖς Πλάτωνος χαίρων διδάγμασι, διαβαλλομένους ἀκούων Χριστιανούς, ὁρῶν δὲ καὶ ἀφόβους πρὸς θάνατον καὶ πάντα τὰ νομιζόμενα φοβερά, ἐνενόουν ἀδύνατον εἶναι ἐν κακίᾳ καὶ φιληδονίᾳ ὑπάρχειν αὐτούς·
 τίς γὰρ φιλήδονος ἢ ἀκρατὴς καὶ ἀνθρωπείων σαρκῶν βορὰν ἡγούμενος ἀγαθόν, δύναιτ᾿ ἂν θάνατον ἀσπάζεσθαι, ὅπως τῶν ἑαυτοῦ στερηθείη ἐπιθυμιῶν, ἀλλ᾿ οὐκ ἐκ παντὸς ξῆν ἀεὶ τὴν ἐνθάδε βιοτὴν καὶ λανθάνειν τοὺς ἄρχοντας ἐπειρᾶτο, οὐχ ὅτι ἑαυτὸν κατήγγελλεν φονευθησόμενον;
 ” Ἔτι δ᾿ ὁ αὐτὸς ἱστορεῖ δεξάμενον τὸν Ἁδριανὸν παρὰ Σερεννίου Γρανιανοῦ, λαμπροτάτου ἡγουμένου, ὑπὲρ Χριστιανῶν περιέχοντα ὡς οὐ δίκαιον εἴη ἐπὶ μηδενὶ ἐγκλήματι βοαῖς δήμου χαριζομένους ἀκρίτως κτείνειν αὐτούς, ἀντιγραφαὶ Μινουκίῳ Φουνδανῷ, ἀνθυπάτῳ τῆς Ἀσίας, προστάττοντα μηδένα κρίνειν ἄνευ ἐγκλήματος καὶ εὐλόγου κατηγορίας·
 καὶ τῆς ἐπιστολῆς δὲ ἀντίγραφον παρατέθειται, τὴν ῾Ρωμαϊκήν φωνήν, ὡς εἶχεν, διαφυλάξας, προλέγει δ᾿ αὐτῆς ταῦτα·
“ καὶ The same writer mentions the war of that time against the Jews and makes this observation,“ For in the present Jewish war it was only Christians whom nar Chocheba, the leader of the rebellion of the Jews, commanded to be punished severely, if they did not deny Jesus as the Messiah and blaspheme him.
” In the samebookhe shows thathisconversion from Greek philosophyto true religion did not take place irrationally, but as an act of deliberate judgment;
 for he writes thus:
 “ ForI myself, whileIwas rejoicing in the teaching of Plato, heard the Christians abused.
 But 1 saw that they were afraid neither of death, nor οf anything usually thought feadul, andIconsidered it was impossible that they were living in wickedness and liberinism.
 For what libertineor incontinent person, or οnewhoands good intheeatingof human flesh, could greet death, that it might take away all his lusts, and would not try to prolong by all means his present life and to avoid the notice οf the rulers, and not give himself up to be murdered?” Moreover,the same writer relates that Hadrian receiveda dispatch infavour of the Christiansfrom Serennius Graninaus,a most distinguished governor, to the effect that it was not just to put them to death, without accusationor trial,to appease popular clamour, and that he wrote an answer to Minucius Fundanus, proconsul of Asia, οrdering him to try no one without inffictment and reasonable accusation, and Justin appendsa copy ofthe letter, preserring the original Latin1 as he had it, and prefixing these ἐξ ἐπιστολῆς δὲ τοῦ μεγίστου καὶ ἐπιφανεστάτου Ἀδριανοῦ τοῦ πατρὸς ὑμῶν ἔχοντες ἀπαιτεῖν ὑμᾶς, καθὰ ἠξιώσαμεν, κελεῦσαι τὰς κρίσεις γίνεσθαι, τοῦτο οὐχ ὡς ὑπὸ Ἀδριανοῦ κελευσθὲν μᾶλλον ἐξιώσαμεν, ἀλλ’ ἐκ τοῦ ἐπίστασθαι δικαίαν ἀξιοῦν τὴν προσφώνησιν.
 ὑπετάξαμεν δὲ καὶ τῆς ἐπιστολῆς Ἀδριανοῦ τὸ ἀντίγραφον, ἵνα καὶ τοῦτο ἀληθεύειν ἡμᾶς γνωρίζητε, καὶ ἔστιν τόδε.
 Τούτοις ὁ μὲν δηλωθεὶς ἀνὴρ αὐτὴν παρατέθειται τὴν Ῥωμαϊκὴν ἀντιγραφήν, ἡμεῖςδ’ ἐπὶ τὸ Ἑλληνικὸν κατὰ δύναμιν αὐτὴν μετειλήφαμεν, ἔχουσαν ὧδε·
 IX.
 Μινουκίῳ Φουνδανῷ.
 ἐπιστολὴν ἐδεξάμην γραφεῖσάν μοι ἀπὸ Σερεννίου Γρανιανοῦ, λαμπροτάτου ὅντινα σὺ διεδέξω.
 οὐ δοκεῖ μοι οὖν τὸ πρᾶγμα ἀζήτητον καταλιπεῖν, ἵνα μήτε οἱ ἄνθρωποι ταράττωνται καὶ τοῖς συκοφάνταις χορηγία κακουργίας παρασχεθῇ.
 εἰ οὖν σαφῶς εἰς ταύτην τὴν ἀξίωσιν οἱ ἐπαρχιῶται δύνανται διισχυρίζεσθαι κατὰ τῶν χριστιανῶν, ὡς καὶ πρὸ βήματος ἀποκρίνασθαι, ἐπὶ τοῦτο μόνον τραπῶσιν, ἀλλ’ οὐκ ἀξιώσεσιν οὐδὲ μόναις βοαῖς.
 πολλῷ γὰρ μᾶλλον προσῆκεν, εἴ τις κατηγορεῖν βούλοιτο, τοῦτό σε διαγινώσκειν.
 εἴ τις οὗν κατηγορεῖ καὶ δείκνυσίν τι παρὰ τοὺς νόμους πράττοντας, οὕτως ὅριζε κατὰ τὴν δύναμιν τοῦ ἁμαρτήματος·
 ὡς μὰ τὸν Ἡρακλέα εἴ τις συκοφαντίας χάριν τοῦτο προτείνοι, διαλάμβανε ὑπὲρ τῆς δεινότητος καὶ φρόντιζε ὅπως ἂν ἐκδικήσειας.
” καὶ τὰ μὲν τῆς Ἁδριανοῦ ἀντιγραφῆς τοιαῦτα.
 remarks:
“ Though we might have begged you to οrder trials to be held, as we desired, οn the strength ofa letter from the great andglorious Emperor Hadrian, we preferrred to rest our request not on the command of Ηadrian but on our knowledge that we are makinga righteous request.
 However, we also appenda copy of the letterof Hadrian, that you may know that we arespeakingthe truthon this point, and hereit is.
” The author quoted then appends theLatin rescript itself, but we have translated it to the best of our powerinto Greek as follows:
 ΙX.
“ To Minucius Fundanus.
 I reeeived a letter written to me from his Excellency Serennius Granianus, your predeeessor.
 1 think that the matter ought not to remain without inquiry, to preventmen from beingharassedor helping the rascalityof informers.
 If then the provincialscan make outa clear case οn these lines against the Christians so as to plead it in open court, let thembe influenced by this alone and not by opinions or mere outeries.
 For it is far more correct if anyone wishes to make an accusation for youto examine this point.
 If then anyone accuses them, and shows that theyare acting illegally, deeide the point according to the nature of the offence, but by Hercules, if anyone brings the matter forward for the purpose of blackmail, investigate gate strenuously and be careful to inffict penalties adequate to the”1 Such wastherescript of Hadrian.
 X.
 τούτου δὲ τὸ χρεὼν μετὰ πρῶτον καὶ εἰ·
 κόστον ἔτος ἐκτίσαντος, Ἀντωνῖνος ὁ κληθεὶς Εὐ σεβὴς τὴν Ῥωμαίων ἀρχὴν διαδέχεται.
 τούτου δὲ ἐν ἔτει πρώτῳ Τελεσφόρου τὸν βίον ἑνδεκάτῳ τῆς λειτουργίας ἐνιαυτῷ μεταλλάξαντος, Ὑγῖνος τὸν κλῆρον τῆς‘ Ρωμαίων ἐπισκοπῆς παραλαμβάνει.
 ἱστορεῖ γε μὴν ὁ Εἰρήναιος τὸν Τελεσφόρον ἴ’ ἡ μάρτύρίῳ’φ’ ἐπίσκοπον τὴν μαρτυρίῳ τὴν τελευτὴν δηλῶν δήλων ὲν ταὐτῷ κατὰ τὸν δηλούμενον Ῥωμίων ἐπίσκοπον Ὑγῖνον Οὐαλεντῖνον ἰδίας αἱρέσεως εἰσηγητὴν καὶ Κέρδωνα τῆς κατὰ Μαρκίωνα πλάνης ἀρχηγὸν ἐπὶ τῆς Ῥώμης ἄμφω γνωρίζεσθαι, γράφει δὲ οὕτως·
 XI.
 “ Οὐαλεντῖνος μὲν γὰρ ἦλθεν εἰς Ῥώμην ἐπὶ Ὑγίνου, ἤκμασεν δὲ ἐπὶ Πίου, καὶ παρέμεινεν ἕως Ἀνικήτου·
 Κερδῶν δ’ ὁ πρὸ Μαρκίωνος καὶ αὐτὸς ἐπὶ Ὑγίνου, ὃς ἢν ἔνατος ἐπίσκοπος, εἰς τὴν ἐκκλησίαν ἐλθὼν καὶ ἐξομολογούμενος, οὕτως διετέλεσεν, ποτὲ μὲν λαθροδιδασκαλῶν, ποτὲ δὲ πάλιν ἐξομολογούμενος, ποτὲ δὲ ἐλεγχόμενος ἐφ’ οἷς ἐδίδασκεν κακῶς, καὶ ἀφιστάμενος τῆς τῶν ἀδελφῶν συνοδίας.
 ” ταῦτα δέ φησιν ἐν τρίτῳ τῶν πρὸς τὰς αἱρέσεις·
 ἔν γε μὴν τῷ πρώτῳ αὖθις περὶ τοῦ Κέρδωνος ταῦτα διέξεισιν·
 “ Κερδῶν δέ τις ἀπὸ τῶν περὶ τὸν Σίμωνα τὰς ἀφορμὰς λαβὼν καὶ ἐπιδημήσας ἐν τῆ Ῥώμῃ ἐπὶ Ὑγίνου ἔνατον κλῆρον τῆς ἐπισκοπικῆς διαδοχῆς ἀπὸ τῶν ἀποστόλων ἐδίδαξεν τὸν ὑπὸ τοῦ νόμου καὶ προφητῶν κεκηρυγμένον θεὸν μὴ εἶναι πατέρα τοῦ κυρίου ἡμῶν Ἰησοῦ Χριστοῦ.
 τὸν μὲν γὰρ γνωρίζεσθαι, τὸν δὲ ἀγνῶτα εἶναι, καὶ τὸν μὲν δίκαιον, τὸν δὲ ἀγαθὸν ὑπάρχειν.
 διαδεξάμενος X.
 After twenty- one years Hadrian paid the debtof nature, aud Antoninus, called Pius, received the sovereignty of ROnle.
 In his first year Telesphorus passed away in the eleventh yearofhis ministry,and Hyginus received the lot of the bishopric of the Romans.
 Irenaeus relates that Telesphorus gained renown in his deathby martyrdom,and states inthe same place that in the time of Hyginus, the aforementioned bishop of Rome, Valentinus, the founder ofa special heresy, and Cerdo, the founder of the Marcionite error, were both famous in Rome Ηe writes thus thus:
 XI.
“ Valentinus came to Rome in the time of Hyginus, but heflourished under pius, and remained until Anicetus, and Cerdo, who before the time of Marcion, in the days of Hyginus,the ninth bishop, had cOme tO the churchand confessed, went on in the same way, sometimes teaching heresy, sometimes confesslng again, and somerimes convicted by his evil teaching and separated from the assembly of the” This he says in the third book against the heresies.
 Moreover, in the first book he makes the following statement about Cerdo:
“Α certain Cerdo had come originally from the circle of Simon and settled in Rome in the timeof Hyginus,who held the ninth plaee in the apostolic succession from the apostles.
 Ηe tauglrt thatthe God preachedbythe Law andtheProphets was notthefather of ourLordJesus Christ,for the one was known, the other unknown, the one vas righteous and the other δὲ αὐτὸν Μαρκίων ὁ Ποντικὸς ηὔξησεν τὸ διδασκαλεῖον ἀπηρυθριασμένως βλασφημῶν.
” ῾Ο δ᾿ αὐτὸς Εἰρήναιος τὸν ἄπειρον βυθὸν τῆς Οὐαλεντίνου πολυπλανοῦς ὕλης εὐτονώτατα διαπλώσας, ἑρπετοῦ δίκην φωλεύοντος ἀπόκρυφον οὖσαν αὐτοῦ καὶ λεληθυῖαν ἀπογυμνοῖ τὴν κακίαν·
 πρὸς τούτοις καὶ ἄλλον τινά, Μάρκος αὐτῷ ὄνομα, κατ’ αὐτοὺς γενέσθαι λέγει μαγικῆς κυβείας ἐμπειρότατον, γράφει δὲ καὶ τὰς ἀτελέστους αὐτῶν τελετὰς μυσεράς τε μυσταγωγίας ἐκφαίνων αὐτοῖς δὴ τούτοις τοῖς γράμμασιν·
“ οἳ μὲν γὰρ ἀυτῶν νυμφῶνα κατασκευάζουσιν καὶ μυσταγωγίαν ἐπιτελοῦσιν μετ’ ἐπιρρήσεών τινων τοῖς τελουμένοις καὶ πνευματικὸν γάμον φάσκουσιν εἶναι τὸ ὐπ᾿ ἀυτῶν γινόμενον κατὰ τὴν ὁμοιότητα τῶν ἄνω συζυγιῶν, οἳ δὲ ἄγουσιν ἐφ’ ὕδωρ καὶ βαπτίζοντες οὕτως ἐπιλέγουσιν·
 ῾ εἰς ὄνομα ἀγνώστου τῶν ὅλων, εἰς ἀλήθειαν μητέρα τῶν πάντων, εἰς τὸν κατελθόντα εἰς τὸν ᾿Ιησοῦν.
 ᾿ ἄλλοι δὲ ῾Εβραϊκὰ ὀνόματα ἐπιλέγουσιν πρὸς τὸ μᾶλλον καταπλήξασθαι τοὺς τελουμένους.
” Ἀλλὰ γὰρ μετὰ τέταρτον τῆς ἐπισκοπῆς ἔτος ῾Υγίνου τελευτήσαντος, Πὶος ἐπὶ ῾Ρώμης ἐγχειρίζεται τὴν λειτουργίαν·
 κατά γε μὴν τὴν Ἀλεξάνδρειαν Μάρκος ἀναδείκνυται ποιμὴν Εὐμένους ἔτη τὰ πάντα δέκα πρὸς τρισὶν ἐκπλήσαντος, τοῦ τε Μάρκου ἐπὶ δέκα ἔτη τῆς λειτουργίας ἀναπαυσαμένου, Κελαδίων τῆς Ἀλεξανδρέων ἐκκλησίας τὴν λειτουργίαν παραλαμβάνει.
 καὶ κατὰ τὴν ῾Ρωμαίων δὲ πόλιν πεντεκαιδεκάτῳ τῆς ἐπισκοπῆς ἐνιαυτῷ Πίου μεταλλάξαντος, Ἀνίκητος τῶν ἐκεῖσε προΐσταται·
 καθ’ ὃν ῾Ηγήσιππος good.
 Marcion οf Pontus succeeded him andincreased the school, blaspheming unblushingly.
” The same Irenauespowerfully exposed the bottomlesspit οf the systemof Valentinus withits many errors, and unbared his secret and latent wickedness while he was lurking likea reptile.
 Furthermore he says that there was in their time1 another named Mareus, most experieneed in the magie arts, and hewrites of his initiations, whieh could not initiate, and ofhisfoul mysteriesp expounffing them in these words:
“ Some of them conStructa bride- ehamber, and celebratea mystery with certain invocationson their initiate, and say that what theydoisa spiritual marriage, according to the likeness of the unions above;
 others bring them to water and baptize them with this invocation,‘ To the nameofthe unknown Fatherofthe universe, to Truth, the motherofall things,to him who descended into’ and others invoke Ηebrew wordsin order more fully to amaze the initiate.
” Αfter the fourth year of his episeopate Hyginus died and Ρius undertook the ministry of Rome.
 Ιn Αlexandria Marcus was appointed after Εumenes hadcompleted thirteen years, and when Μarcus rerted from the ministry after ten years, Celadion received the ministry oftheehurch of the Alexandria.
 In the cityof the Romans Ρius paSSed away in the Rfteenth year of his ministry and Anicetus presided over those there.
 In his time ἱστορεῖ ἑαυτὸν ἐπιδημῆσαι τῆ Ῥώμῃ παραμεῖναί τε αὐτόθι μέχρι τῆς ἐπισκοπῆς Ἐλευθέρου.
 μάλιστα δ’ ἤκμαζεν ἐπὶ τῶνδε Ἰουστῖνος, ἐν φιλοσόφου σχήματι τὸν θεῖον λόγον καὶ τοῖς ὑπὲρ τῆς πίστεως ἐν ἐναγωνιζόμενος συγγράμμασιν·
 ὃς δὴ καὶ γραφὰς κατὰ Μαρκίωνος σύγγραμμα, μνημονεύει ὡς καθ’ ὃν συνέταττε καιρὸν γνωριζομένου τῷ βίῳ τἀνδρός, φησὶν δὲ οὕτως·
 “ Μαρκίωνα δέ τινα Ποντικόν, ὃς καὶ νῦν ἔτι ἐστὶν διδάσκων τοὺς πειθομένους ἄλλον τινὰ νομίξειν μείζονα τοῦ δημιουργοῦ θεόν·
 ὃς καὶ κατὰ πᾶν γένος ἀνθρώπων διὰ τῆς τῶν δαιμόνων συλλήψεως πολλοὺς πεποίηκε βλάσφημα λέγειν καὶ ἀρνεῖσθαι τὸν ποιητὴν τοῦδε τοῦ παντὸς πατέρα εἶναι τοῦ χριστοῦ, ἄλλον δέ τινα ὡς ὄντα μείζονα παρὰ τοῦτον ὁμολογεῖν πεποιηκέναι.
 καὶ πάντες οἱ ἀπὸ τούτων ὡρμημένοι, ὡς ἔφαμεν, Χριστιανοὶ καλοῦνται, ὃν τρόπον καὶ οὐ κοινῶν ὄντων δογμάτων τοῖς φιλοσόφοις τὸ ἐπικαλούμενον ὄνομα τῆς φιλοσοφίας κοινόν ἐστιν·
 ” τούτοις ἐπιφέρει λέγων“ ἔστιν δὲ ἡμῖν καὶ σύνταγμα κατὰ πασῶν τῶν γεγενημένων αἱρέσεων, ᾧ εἰ βούλεσθε ἐντυχεῖν, δώσομεν.
 ” Ὁ δ’ αὐτὸς οὗτος Ἰουστῖνος καὶ πρὸς Ἕλληνας ἱκανώτατα πονήσας, καὶ ἑτέρους λόγους ὑπὲρ τῆς ἡμετέρας πίστεως ἀπολογίαν ἔχοντας βασιλεῖ Αντωνίνῶ τῷ δὴ ἐπικληθέντι Εὐσεβεῖ καὶ τῇ Ῥωμαίων συγκλήτῳ βουλῆ προσφωνεῖ·
 καὶ γὰρ ἐπὶ τῆς Ῥώμης τὰς διατριβὰς ἐποιεῖτο.
 ἐμφαίνει δ’ ἑαυτὸν ὅστις καὶ πόθεν ἢν, διὰ τῆς ἀπολογίας ἐν τούτοις·
 XII.
 “ Αὐτοκράτορι Τίτῳ Αἰλίῳ Ἀδριανῷ 1 Ἀντωνίνῳ Εὐσεβεῖ Καίσαρι Σεβαστῷ καὶ Οὐη- Hegesippus states that he stayed in Rome and remained there until the episcopate of Eleutherus.
 Ιn their time Justin vas at the height of his fame;
 in the garbor philosopher he servedas ambassador of the wordof God and contendedinhis writings for the faith.
 Ηe wroteatreatise against Marcion and mentions that at the time he was writing the heretic was ahve and nororious.
 Ηe speaks thus:
“ Αnd there wasa certain Μarcion of Pontus who even now is still teaching those who believe him to think that there is another God greater than the creator.
 Throughout the Whole race of men by the instigation of demons he has made many to speak blasphemously and to deny that the Maker of this universeis the Fatherof Christ, and to confess that there is another greater than He.
 Αll those whobegin from them,as we said, are called Christians just as the name of philosophy is common to philosophers though their doctrines ” Ηe goes on to say,“ Αnd we have a trearise against all the heresies which have arisen which we will give to any who wish to study it.
” The same Justinlaboured powerfully againstthe Oentiles,and addressed other arguments, affording a defencefor our faith, to the Emperor Antoninus, called Ρius, and tothe senate ofthe Romans,for he was living in Rome.
 In his Apology he explains his position and origin as follows:
 XII.
“ To the EmperorTitus Aelius Hadrian Antoninus Ρius.
 Caesar Augustus, and to Verissimus, his son the philosopher, ρισσίμῳ υἱῷ φιλοσόφῳ καὶ Λουκίῳ φιλοσόφου Καίσαρος φύσει υἱῷ καὶ Εὐσεβοῦς εἰσποιητῷ, ἐραστῇ παιδείας, ἱερᾷ τε συγκλήτῳ καὶ παντὶ δήμῳ Ῥωμαίων ὑπὲρ τῶν ἐκ παντὸς γένους ἀνθρώπων ἀδίκως μισουμένων καὶ ἐπηρεαζομένων Ιουστῖνος Πρίσκου τοῦ Βακχείου τῶν ἀπὸ Φλαυίας Νέας πόλεως τῆς Συρίας Παλαιστίνης, εἷς αὐτῶν, τὴν προσφώνησιν καὶ ἔντευξιν πεποίημαι.
 ” Εντευχθεὶς δὲ καὶ ὑφ’ ἑτέρων ὁ αὐτὸς βασιλεὺς ἐπὶ τῆς Ἀσίας ἀδελφῶν παντοίαις ὕβρεσιν πρὸς τῶν ἐπιχωρίων δήμων καταπονουμένων, τοιαύτης ἠξίωσεν τὸ κοινὸν τῆς Ἀσίας διατάξεως·
 XIII.
“ Αὐτοκράτωρ Καῖσαρ Μάρκος Αὐρήλιος Ἀντωνῖνος Σεβαστός, Ἀρμένιος, ἀρχιερεὺς μέγιστος, δημαρχικῆς ἐξουσίας τὸ πέμπτον καὶ τὸ δέκατον, ὕπατος τὸ τρίτον, τῷ κοινῷ τῆς Ἀσίας χαίρειν.
 ἐγὼ μὲν οἶδ’ ὅτι καὶ τοῖς θεοῖς ἐπιμελές ἐστι μὴ λανθάνειν τοὺς τοιούτους·
 πολὺ γὰρ μᾶλλον ἐκεῖνοι κολάσαιεν ἂν τοὺς μὴ βουλομένους αὐτοῖς προσκυνεῖν ἢ ὑμεῖς.
 οὓς εἰς ταραχὴν ἐμβάλλετε, βεβαιοῦντες τὴν γνώμην αὐτῶν ἥνπερ ἔχουσιν, ὡς ἀθέων κατηγοροῦντες·
 εἴη δ’ ἂν κἀκείνοις αἱρετὸν τῷ δοκεῖν κατηγορουμένοις τεθνάναι μᾶλλον ἢ ξῆν ὑπὲρ τοῦ οἰκείου θεοῦ·
 ὅθεν καὶ νικῶσι, προιέμενοι τὰς ἑαυτῶν ψυχὰς ἤπερ πειθόμενοι οἷς ἀξιοῦτε and to Lucius, the lover of instruction, the sonby nature ofthe philosopher- emperor,and by adoption οf Pius, and totheholy senate and to the wholepeople of Rome, on behalf of those men οf every race who are unjustlyhated and abused,I, Justin, the son of Priscus, the son of Baccheius, of Flavia Neapolisin Palestinian syria, mysWa christian, offer an address and enteaty.
” The same Εmperοrwas entreated by οther Αsiatic christians who had suffered all manner of injury from the local population and he thought fit to send the following decree to the Council of Asia.
 1 XIII.
“ The Εmperor Caesar Mareus Aurelius Antoninus Augustus Armenicus, Pontifex Maximus, Tribune forthe nfteenth time, Consul forthe third time, to Councilof Asia, greeting.
 2 I know that the gods aho take care that such men should not escape notice, for they would be far more likely to punish those who are unwilling to worship them than you are.
 But you drive them into tumult, for you con- nrm them in the opinion which they hold by accusing them as atheists, and they too when so accused might well prerer apparent3 death rather than life for the sake of their οwn ood.
 wherefore they are also conquerors because they sacrffice their lives rather πράττειν αὐτούς.
 περὶ δὲ τῶν σεισμῶν τῶν γεγονότων καὶ γινομένων, οὐκ ἄτοπον ὑμᾶς ὑπομνῆσαι ἀθυμοῦντας μὲν ὅταν περ ὦσιν, παραβάλλοντας δὲ τὰ ἡμέτερα πρὸς τὰ ἐκείνων.
 οἳ μὲν οὖν εὐπαρρησιαστότεροι γίνονται πρὸς τὸν θεόν, ὑμεῖς δὲ παρὰ πάντα τὸν χρόνον καθ’ ὃν ἀγνοεῖν δοκεῖτε, τῶν τε θεῶν τῶν ἄλλων ἀμελεῖτε καὶ τῆς θρησκείας τῆς περὶ τὸν ἀθάνατον·
 ὃν δὴ τοὺς Χριστιανοὺς θρησκεύοντας ἐλαύνετε καὶ διώκετε ἕως θανάτου.
 ὑπὲρ δὲ τῶν τοιούτων ἤδη καὶ πολλοὶ τῶν περὶ τὰς ἐπαρχίας ἡγεμόνων καὶ τῷ θειοτάτῳ ἡμῶν ἔγραψαν πατρί, οἷς καὶ ἀντέγραφεν μηδὲν ἐνοχλεῖν τοῖς τοιούτοις, εἰ μὴ ἐμφαίνοιντό τι περὶ τὴν‘ Ρωμαίων ἡγεμονίαν ἐγχειροῦντες.
 καὶ ἐμοὶ δὲ περὶ τῶν τοιούτων πολλοὶ ἐσήμαναν·
 οἷς δὴ καὶ ἀντέγραψα κατακολουθῶν τῇ τοῦ πατρὸς γνώμῃ.
 εἰ δέ τις ἐπιμένοι τινὰ τῶν τοιούτων εἰς πράγματα φέρων ὡς δὴ τοιοῦτον, ἐκεῖνος ὁ καταφερόμενος ἀπολελύσθω τοῦ ἐγκλήματος καὶ ἐὰν φαίνηται τοιοῦτος ὤν, ὁ δὲ καταφέρων ἔνοχος ἕαται δίκης.
 προετέθη ἐν Ἐφέσῳ ἐν τῷ κοινῷ τῆς Ἀσίας.
 ” Τούτοις οὕτω χωρήσασιν ἐπιμαρτυρῶν Μελίτων, τῆς ἐν Σάρδεσιν ἐκκλησίας ἐπίσκοπος κατ’ αὐτὸ γνωριζόμενος τοῦ χρόνου, δῆλός ἐστιν ἐκ τῶν εἰρημένων αὐτῷ ἐν ἧ πεποίηται πρὸς αὐτοκράτορα Οὐῆρον ὑπὲρ τοῦ καθ’ ἡμᾶς δόγματος ἀπολογίᾳ.
 XIV.
 Ἐπὶ δὲ τῶν δηλουμένων, Ἀνικήτου τῆς Ῥωμαίων ἐκκλησίας ἡγουμένου, Πολύκαρπον ἔτι περιόντα τῷ βίῳ γενέσθαι τε ἐπὶ Ῥώμης καὶ εἰς ὁμιλίαν τῷ Ἀνικήτῳ ἐλθεῖν διά τι ζήτημα περὶ than οbey and do what you command.
 With regard to the carthquakes which have taken place and are still going on it is not οut of placeto remind you that when they happenyou are depressed, and soset upa comparison betweenour position and theirs.
 ney obtain increased confidence towards Ood, but you the whole of the time neglect the other gods and the worship of the immortal.
 1 But when the Christians worship him you harry and persecute them to death.
 Αnd many οf the provincial governors mote formerly on behalf of such men to οur divine father, and he rephed that they werenot to be interfered with unless they appeared to be plotting against the Roman government.
 Αnd to me aho many reported about such men, and to them I too replied consistently with my father's opinion.
 But if anyone Ρersist in taking action against any oneof such persons, on the ground that he is so, let that one who is accused be released nom the charge, even if it appear that he is such, but the accuser shall be liable to penalty.
 Published at Ephesus inthe Council of Αsia.
” Further testimony to these events is given by Mehto, the famous bishop of the church in Sarffis at that time, as is clear from whathe says in the Apology which he made to the Emperor verus οn behalf οf οur faith.
 XIV.
 During the time of theemperorsreferred to, while Anicetus was ruling the church of Rome, Irenaeus relates that Polycarp was still alive and came to Rome and conversed with Anicetus about τῆς κατὰ τὸ πάσχα ἡμέρας Εἰρήναιος ἱστορεῖ.
 καὶ ἄλλην δὲ ὁ αὐτὸς περὶ τοῦ Πολυκάρπου πάρα·
 δίδωσιν διήγησιν, ἢν ἀναγκαῖον τοῖς περὶ αὐτοῦ δηλουμένοις ἐπισυνάψαι, οὕτως ἔχουσαν·
 ΑΠΟ ΤΟΥ ΤΡΙΤΟΥ ΤΩΝ ΠΡΟΣ ΤΑΣ ΑΙΡΕΣΕΙΣ ΕΙΡΗΝΑΙΟΥ“ Καὶ Πολύκαρπος δὲ οὐ μόνον ὑπὸ ἀποστόλων μαθητευθεὶς καὶ συναναστραθεὶς πολλοῖς τοῖς τὸν κύριον ἑορακόσιν, ἀλλὰ καὶ ὑπὸ ἀποστόλων κατασταθεὶς εἰς τὴν Ἀσίαν ἐν τῇ ἐν Σμύρνη ἐκκλησίᾳ ἐπίσκοπος, ὃν καὶ ἡμεῖς ἑοράκαμεν ἐν τῇ πρώτῃ ἡμῶν ἡλικίᾳ ἐπὶ πολὺ γὰρ παρέμεινεν καὶ πάνυ γηραλέος ἐνδόξως καὶ ἐπιφανέστατα μαρτυρήσας ἐξῆλθεν τοῦ βίου), ταῦτα διδάξας ἀεὶ ἃ καὶ παρὰ τῶν ἀποστόλων ἔμαθεν, ἃ καὶ ἡ ἐκκλησία παραδίδωσιν, ἃ καὶ μόνα ἐστὶν ἀληθῆ.
 μαρτυροῦσι τούτοις αἱ κατὰ τὴν Ἀσίαν ἐκκλησίαι πᾶσαι καὶ οἱ μέχρι νῦν διαδεδεγμένοι τὸν Πολύκαρπον, πολλῷ ἀφιοπιστότερον καὶ βεβαιότερον ἀληθείας μάρτυρα ὄντα Οὐαλεντίνου καὶ Μαρκίωνος καὶ τῶν λοιπῶν κακογνωμόνων·
 ὃς καὶ ἐπὶ Ἀνικήτου ἐπιδημήσας τῆ Ῥώμῃ, πολλοὺς ἀπὸ τῶν προειρημένων αἱρετικῶν ἐπέστρεψεν εἰς τὴν ἐκκλησίαν τοῦ θεοῦ, μίαν καὶ μόνην ταύτην ἀλήθειαν κηρύξας ὑπὸ τῶν ἀποστόλων παρειληφέναι τὴν ὑπὸ τῆς ἐκκλησίας παραδεδομένην.
 καὶ εἰσὶν οἱ ἀκηκοότες αὐτοῦ ὅτι Ἰωάννης ὁ τοῦ κυρίου μαθητὴς ἐν τῇ Ἐφέσῳ πορευθεὶς λούσασθαι καὶ ἰδὼν ἔσω Κήρινθον ἐξήλατο τοῦ βαλανείου μὴ λουσάμενος, ἀλλ’ ἐπειπώνἴ’ φύγωμεν, μὴ καὶ τὸ βαλανεῖον συμπέσῃ, ἔνδον ὄντος Κηρίνθου τοῦ τῆς ἀληθείας ἐχθροῦ.’
 some difficulty as to the day of the Passover.
 The same writer tells another story about Polycarp which it is necessary to add to what has been said about him It runs as follows:
 From the third book of Irenaeus against Heresies“ Αnd Ρolycarp also was not only instructed by apostles and conversed with many who had seen the Lord, but was also appointed bishop by apostles in Asia in the churchin smyma.
 We also saw himin our childhood, for heliveda long timeand extreme extreme oldage passed from life,a splenffid and glorious martyr.
 Ηe conrtantly taught those things which he had leamt from the apostles, which also are the traffidItion of the church, which alone are true.
 To these facts all the churehes in Αsia bear witness, and the present successors of Ρolycarp, and he iS a far more trustworthy and reliable witness of the truth than valentinus and Marcion and the others who hold wrong opinions.
 Ιn the time οf Αnicetus he visited Rome and converted many of the abovementioned heretics to the churchof God, preaching that the one and only truth whichhehad received from the apostles was that which is the tradition of the church.
 Αnd there are those who heard him tell that John the ffisciple of the Lord Went in Εphesus to bathe and seeing Cerinthus within, sprang out of the baths without bathing calling οut,‘ Let us ny lest the baths fall in, since Cerinthus, the enemy of καὶ αὐτὸς δὲ ὁ Πολύκαρπος Μαρκίωνί ποτε εἰς ὄφιν αὐτῷ ἐλθόντι καὶ φήσαντι ῾ἐπιγίνωσκε ἡμᾶς᾿ ἀπεκρίθη῾ ἐπιγινώακω·
 ἐπιγινώσκω τὸν πρωτότοκον τοῦ οατανᾶ.
 ᾿ τοσαύτην οἱ ἀπόστολοι καὶ οἱ μαθηταὶ αὐτῶν ἔαχον εὐλάβειαν πρὸς τὸ μηδὲ μέχρι λόγου κοινωνεῖν τινὶ τῶν παραχαρασσόντων τὴν ἀλήθειαν, ὡς καὶ Παῦλος ἔφησεν αἱρετικὸν ἄνθρωπον μετὰ μίαν καὶ δευτέραν νουθεαίαν παραιτοῦ, εἰδὼς ὅτι ἐξέστραπται ὁ τοιοῦτος καὶ ἁμαρτάνει ὢν αὐτοκατάκριτος.
᾿ ἔστιν δὲ καὶ ἐπιστολὴ Πολυκάρπου πρὸς Φιλιππηαίους γεγραμμένη ἱκανωτάτη, ἐξ ἧς καὶ τὸν χαρακτῆρα τῆς πίατεως αὐτοῦ καὶ τὸ κήρυγμα τῆς ἀληθείας οἱ βουλόμενοι καὶ φροντίζοντες τῆς ἑαυτῶν σωτηρίας δύνανται μαθεῖν.
 ” ταῦτα ὁ Εἰρήναιος·
 ὁ γέ τοι Πολύκαρπος ἐν τῆ δηλωθείσῃ πρὸς Φιλιππηαίους αὐτοῦ γραφῇ, φερομένη εἰς δεῦρο, κέχρηταί τισιν μαρτυρίαις ἀπὸ τῆς Πέτρου προτέρας ἐπιστολῆς.
 Ἀντωνῖνον μὲν δὴ τὸν Eὐσεβῆ κληθέντα, εἰκοστὸν καὶ δεύτερον ἔτος τῆς ἀρχῆς διανύααντα, Μάρκος Αὐρήλιος Οὐῆρος, ὁ καὶ Ἀντωνῖνος, υἱὸς αὐτοῦ, σὺν καὶ Λουκίῳ ἀδελφῷ διαδέχεται.
 XV.
 ἐν τούτῳ δὲ ὁ Πολύκαρπος μεγίστων τὴν Ἀσίαν ἀναθορυβησάντων διωγμῶν μαρτυρίῳ τελειοῦται, ἄναγκαιότατον δ᾿ αὐτοῦ τὸ τέλος ἐγγράφως ἔτι φερόφερόμενον ἡγοῦμαι δεῖν μνήμῃ τῆσδε τῆς ἱστορίας καταθέσθαι.
 ἔστιν δὲ ἡ γραφὴ ἐκ προσώπου ἦς αὐτὸς ἐκκλησίας ἡγεῖτο, ταῖς κατὰ τόπον παροικίαις the truth, is’ Αnd Ρolycarp himself when Marcion οnce met him and said,‘ Recognize us,’ answered,‘ I do, I recognize the Rrst- born of’such care ffidtheaportles and their disciples take not even to join in conversation vith any of those who mutilate the truth, as Ρaul also said,‘A man thatisheretical aftera first and secondexhortation, refuse, knowing sucha οne ispervertedand sinneth, being self- condemned.’
 There is alsoa most powerful letter of’s writtentothe Philippians, from which those who wish and care for their own salvation can learn both the character of his faith and the preaching of the” so says Irenaeus.
 Moreover, Ρolycarp,in his above- mentioned lerterto the Philippians, which is still extant, has made some quotations from the first Epistle of Peter.
 1 Antoninus, called Pius, held the sovereignty for twenty- two years2 and was succeededbyMareus Aurelius Verus, also called Antoninus, his son, together withhis brother Lucius.
 XV.
 Αt this time3 Polycarp was consecrated by martyrdom when great persecutions again ffisturbed Αsia, andI think it most necessary to give in this history the account ofhis end, which is still extant in writing.
 The document purports to be from the ehureh of which hewas the leader, and gives to the neighbouring τὰ κατ’ αὐτὸν ἀποσημαίνουσα διὰ τούτων·
“ ῾Η ἐκκλησία τοῦ θεοῦ ἡ παροικοῦσα Σμύρναν τῆ ἐκκλησίᾳ τοῦ θεοῦ τῆ παροικούσῃ ἐν Φιλομηλίῳ καὶ πάσαις ταῖς κατὰ πάντα τόπον τῆς ἁγίας καθολικῆς ἐκκλησίας παροικίαις ἔλεος εἰρήνη καὶ ἀγάπη θεοῦ πατρὸς καὶ κυρίου ἡμῶν’ Ιησοῦ Χριστοῦ πληθυνθείη.
 ἐγράψαμεν ὑμῖν, ἀδελφοί, τὰ κατὰ τοὺς μαρτυρήσαντας καὶ τὸν μακάριον Πολύκαρπον, ὅστις ὥσπερ ἐπισφραγίσας διὰ τῆς μαρτυρίας αὐτοῦ κατέπαυσε τὸν διωγμόν. ’
 ’ Τούτοις τούτοις ἑξῆς πρὸ τῆς ἀμφὶ τοῦ Πολυκάρπου διηγήσεως τὰ κατὰ τοὺς λοιποὺς ἀνιστοροῦσι μάρτυρας, οἵας ἐνστάσεις πρὸς τὰς ἀλγηδόνας ἐνεδείξαντο, διαγράφοντες.
 καταπλῆξαι γάρ φασι τοὺς ἐν κύκλῳ περιεστῶτας, θεωμένους τοτὲ μὲν μάστιξι μέχρι καὶ τῶν ἐνδοτάτω φλεβῶν καὶ ἀρτηριῶν καταξαινομένους, ὡς ἤδη καὶ τὰ ἐν μυχοῖς ἀπόρρητα τοῦ σώματος σπλάγχνα τε αὐτῶν καὶ μέλη κατοπτεύεσθαι, τοτὲ δὲ τοὺς ἀπὸ θαλάττης κήρυκας καί τινας ὀξεῖς ὀβελίσκους ὑποστρωννυμένους, καὶ διὰ παντὸς εἴδους κολάσεων καὶ βασάνων προιόντας καὶ τέλος θηραὶν εἰς βορὰν παραδιδομένους.
 μάλιστα δὲ ἱστοροῦσιν διαπρέψαι τὸν γενναιότατον Γερμανικόν, ὑπορρωννύντα σὺν θείᾳ χάριτι τὴν ἔμφυτον περὶ τὸν θάνατον τοῦ σώματος δειλίαν.
 βουλομένου γέ τοι τοῦ ἀνθυπάτου αὐτὸν προβαλλομένου τε τὴν ἡλικίαν καὶ ἀντιβολοῦντος κομιδῆ νέον ὄντα καὶ ἀκμαῖον dioeeses1the following accolmt of what happened to him.
“ The ehurchofGod whichsojournsin Smgrna,to the Church of God which sojourns in Philomelium, 2 and to all the sojournings of the Ηoly Catholic Church in every place.
 Mercy, peace, and love of God the Father, and our Lord Jesus Christ be multiplied.
 We write toyou, brethren, the story or the martyrs and of the blessed Polycarp, who put an end to the persecutiOn by his martyrdom as thought adding the seal.
” They then go on, before the narrative about Polycarp, to givethe stOry of the other martyrs, deSeribing the constancy which they showed against torture, for they say that thOse who were Standlng around were amazed when they Saw that at one time they Were tOrn by Scourges dOwn to deepseated veins and arterieS, so that the hidden contents of the receSsesOftheir bodies, their entrails and organs, were exposed to sight.
 Αt another time they were stretched on seashells andon sharp points, were taken through all kinds of punishment and torture, and finally vere given to be eaten by wild beasts.
 They say that the noble Germanicus vas especially distinguished, being Strengthenedby the grace ofGodto oVercOme the natural cowardiceofthe body for death.
 Even when the proconsul wished to dissuade him, urging his youth and entreating him as he was still just in the flowerof his youth οἶκτον ἑαυτοῦ λαβεῖν, μὴ μελλῆσαι, προθύμωςδ’ ἐπισπάσασθαι εἰς ἑαυτὸν τὸ θηρίον, μόνον οὐχὶ βιασάμενον καὶ παροξύναντα, ὡς ἂν τάχιον τοῦ ἀδίκου καὶ ἀνόμου βίου αὐτῶν ἀπαλλαγείη.
 τούτου δ’ ἐπὶ τῷ διαπρεπεῖ θανάτῳ τὸ πᾶν πλῆθος ἀποθαυμάσαν τῆς ἀνδρείας τὸν θεοφιλῆ μάρτυρα καὶ τὴν καθόλου τοῦ γένους τῶν χριστιανῶν ἀρετήν, ἀθρόως ἐπιβοᾶν ἄρξασθαι“ αἶρε τοὺς ἀθέους·
 ζητείσθω Πολύκαρπος. ’
 ’ καὶ δὴ πλείστης ἐπὶ ταῖς βοαῖς γενομένης ταραχῆς, Φρύγα τινὰ τὸ γένος, Κόϊντον τοὔνομα, νεωστὶ ἐκ τῆς Φρυγίας ἐπιστάντα, ἰδόντα τοὺς θῆρας καὶ τὰς ἐπὶ τούτοις ἀπειλάς, καταπτῆξαι τὴν ψυχὴν μαλακισθέντα καὶ τέλος τῆς σωτηρίας ἐνδοῦναι.
 ἐδήλου δὲ τοῦτον ὁ τῆς προειρημένης γραφῆς λόγος προοπετέστερον ἀλλ’ οὐ κατ’ εὐλάβειαν ἐπιπηδῆσαι τῷ δικαστηρίῳ σὺν ἑτέροις, ἁλόνταδ’ οὖν ὅμως καταφανὲς ὑπόδειγμα τοῖς πᾶσιν παρασχεῖν, ὅτι μὴ δέοι τοῖς τοιούτοις ῥιψοκινδύνως καὶ ἀνευλαβῶς ἐπιτολμᾶν.
 ἀλλὰ ταύτῃ μὲν εἶχεν πέρας τὰ κατὰ τούτους·
 τόν γε μὴν θαυμασιώτατον Πολύκαρπον τὰ μὲν πρῶτα τούτων ἀκούσαντα ἀτάραχον μεῖναι, εὐσταθὲς τὸ ἦθος καὶ ἀκίνητον φυλάξαντα, βούλεσθαί τε αὐτοῦ κατὰ πόλιν περιμένειν·
 πεισθέντα γε μὴν ἀντιβολοῦσι τοῖς ἀμφ’ αὐτὸν καὶ ὡς ἄν ὑπεξέλθοι παρακαλοῦσι, προελθεῖν εἰς οὐ πόρρω διεστῶτα τῆς πόλεως ἀγρὸν διατρίβειν τε σὺν ὀλίγοις ἐνταῦθα, νύκτωρ καὶ μεθ’ ἡμέραν οὔτι ἕτερον πράττοντα ἢ ταῖς πρὸς τὸν κύριον διακαρτεροῦντα εὐχαῖς·
 δι’ ὧν δεῖσθαι καὶ ἱκετεύειν εἰρήνην ἐξαιτούμενον ταῖς ἀνὰ πᾶσαν τὴν οἴκου οἰκουμένην ἐκκλησίαις, τοῦτο γὰρ καὶ εἶναι ἐκ τοῦ to have pity on himself, he did not hesitate, but took pains to drag the beast to himself, almost forcing him and provoking him in order that he might be the sooner free from an unjust and wicked life.
 Αt his glorious death the whole crowd was amazed at the God- loving martyr for his bravery, and at the courage οf the wholeraceof Christians,and began to howlout together,“ Kill the atheists! Let Ρolycarpbesent” Whena great uproararoseat this cry,a certain nativeofPhrygia named Quintus, lately arrived from Ρhrygia, seeing the beasts and the other threats, was overeome in his mindand weakened and hnally abandonedhis salvation.
 The nauative of the above- mentioned document showS that this man had rushed to the tribunal with the others ina headstrong but irreligious spirit;
 but that nevertheless whenhewas conricted he gave manifest proofs to all that suchmen ought not to make foolhaffiy ventures which do not spring from religion.
 Such was the fate of these men.
 Vet the wonderful Polycarp, when henrst heard this, remained undisturbed, keeping his mind steadfast and unmoved, and wished to Stay there in the city.
 But the urgency of his friends and their entreaty that he should goout persuaded him, and he departed to a farm not far fromthecity where he stayed withafew others,and night and day ffid nothing but persevere in prayers to the Lord.
 ln them he entreated and supplicated for peace, begging thatit be given the churcheS throughout the world, for this was his invariable custom.
 παντὸς αὐτῷ σύνηθες.
 καὶ δὴ εὐχόμενον, ἐν ὀπτασίᾳ τριῶν πρότερον ἡμερῶν τῆς συλλήψεως νύκτωρ ἰδεῖν τὸ ὑπὸ κεφαλῆς αὐτῷ στρῶμα ἀθρόως οὕτως ὑπὸ πυρὸς φλεχθὲν δεδαπανῆσθαι, ἔξυπνον δ’ ἐπὶ τούτῳ γενόμενον, εὐθὺς ὑφερμηνεῦσαι τοῖς παροῦσι τὸ φανέν, μόνον οὐχὶ τὸ μέλλον προθεσπίσαντα σαφῶς τε ἀνειπόντα τοῖς ἀμφ’ αὐτὸν ὅτι δέοι αὐτὸν διὰ Χριστὸν πυρὶ τὴν ζωὴν μεταλλάξαι.
 ἐπικειμένων δὴ οὖν σὺν πάσῃ σπουδῇ τῶν ἀναζητούντων αὐτόν, αὖθις ὑπὸ τῆς τῶν ἀδελφῶν διαθέσεως καὶ στοργῆς ἐκβεβιασμένον μεταβῆναί φασιν ἐφ’ ἕτερον ἀγρόν·
 ἔνθα μετ’ οὐ πλεῖστον τοὺς συνελαύνοντας ἐπελθεῖν, δύο δὲ τῶν αὐτόθι συλλαβεῖν παίδων·
 ὧν θάτερον αἰκισαμένους ἐπιστῆναι δι’ αὐτοῦ τῆ τοῦ Πολυκάρπου καταγωγῇ, ὀψὲ δὲ τῆς ὥρας ἐπελθόντας, αὐτὸν μὲν εὑρεῖν ἐν ὑπερῴῳ κατακείμενον, ὅθεν δυνατὸν ὂν αὐτῷ ἐφ’ ἑτέραν μεταστῆναι οἰκίαν, μὴ βεβουλῆσθαι, εἰπόντα “ τὸ θέλημα τοῦ θεοῦ γινέσθω. ’
 ’ καὶ δὴ μαθὼν παρόντας, ὡς ὁ λόγος φησί, καταβὰς αὐτοῖς διελέξατο εὗ μάλα φαιδρῷ καὶ πραοτάτῳ προσώπῳ, ὡς καὶ θαῦμα δοκεῖν ὁρᾶν τοὺς πάλαι τοῦ ἀνδρὸς ἀγνῶτας, ἐναποβλέποντας τῷ τῆς ἡλικίας αὐτοῦ παλαιῷ καὶ τῷ σεμνῷ καὶ εὐσταθεῖ τοῦ τρόπου, καὶ εἰ τοσαύτη γένοιτο σπουδὴ ὑπὲρ τοῦ τοιοῦτον συλληφθῆναι πρεσβύτην.
 ὃ δ’ οὐ μελλήσας εὐθέως τράπεζαν αὐτοῖς παρατεθῆναι προστάττει, εἶτα τροφῆς ἀφθόνου μεταλαβεῖν ἀξιοῖ, μίαν τε ὥραν, ὡς ἂν προσεύξοιτο ἀδεῶς, παρ’ αὐτῶν αἰτεῖται·
 ἐπιτρεφάντων δὲ ἀναστὰς ηὔχετο, ἔμπλεως τῆς χάριτος ὢν τοῦ κυρίου, ὡς ἐκπλήττεσθαι τοὺς παρόντας εὐχομένου αὐτοῦ ἀκροωμένους πολλούς While he was praying, ina vision at night three days before his capture, he sawthe pillow under his head suddenly flaming with fire and so destroyed, and when he woke up at this he at once interpreted what he had Seento those present, all but foretelling the future and clearly announcing to his friends that in fire he must give up his life for Christ 's While those who were seeking for him were pressing on with great zeal, he was again constrained by the affection and love of the brethren to move to another farm.
 Shortly after the pursuers came up and arrested two οf the slaves there.
 They tortured one οf them and were brought by him to the abode of Ροlycarp.
 They entered in the evening and found him lying in an upper chamber.
 It was possible for him to have moved thence to another house, but hewas not willing and said,“ The Lord's will be done.
” When he heard thattheyhad come, So thestory says, he went down and conversed with them witha bright and gentle countenance, so that those who did not know him before thought that they sawa marvel when they regarded his old age and his venerable and Steadfast behaviour, and they wondered that there should be such activity for the arrest οf an οld man of sueh charaeter.
 Ηe did not delaybutimmediately ordereda table to be set for them and invited them to partake of plentiful food, asking from them a single hour that he might pray unffisturbed.
 They gave him leave, and hearoseand prayed, ffiled withthe grace of the Lord, So that thosewhowere present were astonished when they heard his prayer, and many of them alrcady began τε αὐτῶν μετανοεῖν ἤδη ἐπὶ τῷ τοιοῦτον ἀναιρεῖσθαι μέλλειν σεμνὸν καὶ θεοπρεπῆ πρεσβύτην.
 Επὶ τούτοις ἡ περὶ αὐτοῦ γραφὴ κατὰ λέξιν ὧδέ πως τὰ ἑξῆς τῆς ἰατορίας ἔχει·
 “ ἐπεὶ δέ ποτε κατέπαυσε τὴν προσευχὴν μνημονεύσας ἁπάντων καὶ τῶν πώποτε αυμβεβληκότων αὐτῷ, μικρῶν τε καὶ μεγάλων, ἐνδόξων τε καὶ ἀδόξων, καὶ πάσης τῆς κατὰ τὴν οἰκουμένην καθολικῆς ἐκκλησίας, τῆς ὥρας ἐλθούσης τοῦ ἐξιέναι, ὄνῳ καθίσαντες αὐτὸν ἤγαγον εἰς τὴν πόλιν, ὄντος σαββάτου μεγάλου.
 καὶ ὑπήντα αὐτῷ ὁ εἰρήναρχος Ἡρῴδης καὶ ὁ πατὴρ αὐτοῦ Νικητὴς·
 οἳ καὶ μεταθέντες αὐτὸν εἰς τὸ ὄχημα, ἔπειθον παρακαθεζόμενοι καὶ λέγοντες τί γὰρ κακόν ἐστιν εἰπεῖν, κύριος Καῖσαρ, καὶ θῦσαι καὶ διασῴζεσθαι; ’
 ὃ δὲ τὰ μὲν πρῶτα οὐκ ἀπεκρίνατο, ἐπιμενόντων δὲ αὐτῶν, ἔφη οὐ μέλλω πράττεινδ’ συμβουλεύετέ μοι. ’
 οἱ δὲ ἀποτυχόντες τοῦ πεῖσαι αὐτόν, δεινὰ ῥήματα ἔλεγον καὶ μετὰ σπουδῆς καθῄρουν, ὡς κατιόντα ἀπὸ τοῦ ὀχήματος ἀποσῦραι τὸ ἀντικνήμιον·
 ἀλλὰ γὰρ μὴ ἐπιστραφείς, οἷα μηδὲν πεπονθώς, προθύμως μετὰ σπουδῆς ἐπορεύετο, ἀγόμενος εἰς τὸ στάδιον.
 θορύβου δὲ τηλικούτου ὄντος ἐν τῷ σταδίῳ, ὡς μηδὲ πολλοῖς ἀκουσθῆναι, τῷ Πολυκάρπῳ εἰσιόντι εἰς τὸ στάδιοι’ ν φωνὴ ἐξ οὐρανοῦ γέγονενἴ’ ἴσχυε, Πολύκαρπε, καὶ ἀνδρίζου.’
 καὶ τὸν μὲν εἰπόντα οὐδεὶς εἶδεν, τὴν δὲ φωνὴν τῶν ἡμετέρων πολλοὶ ἤκουσαν.
 προσαχθέντος οὗν αὐτοῦ, θόρυβος ἢν μέγας ἀκουσάντων ὅτι Πολύκαρπος συνείληπται.
 λοιπὸν οὗν προσελθόντα ἀν- to repent thatsovenerable and godlikean old manwasgoing to be killed.
 After this the document concerning him continuesas follows1:
“ Νοw when he had at last finished prayer, after remembering all who had cver even come his way, both small and great, high and low, and the whole Catholic Church throughout the world, the hour came for departure, and they set him on an ass, and led him into the city, οn a‘ great Sabbath day. ’
 2 Αnd the poliee captrialn Ηerοd and his Νiketas mct him and removed him into the wagon, and sat by his side trying to persuade him and saying :
‘ But what hannisit to say,“ Lord Caesar,”and offer sacrifice, and to be saved?’ But he at firstdidnot answer them, but when they continued he said:
 ‘ I am not going to do what you counsel me.’
 Αnd they gaveup the attemptto persuade him, and bcganto speak fiercely, and turnedhim out in sucha huuy thatin getting down from the wagon he scraped his shin;
 and without tuming round, as thoughhehad suffered nothing, he walked on promptly and quickly, and was taken to the arena, while the uproar in the arena was so great that no one could evenbe heard.
 Νow when Polycarp entered into the arena there came a voice from heaven:
‘ Be strong, Polycarp, and play the man.’
 Αnd noonesaw the speaker, but many οfourfriends who were there heard the voice.
 Αnd when hewas brought forward, there wasa great uproar of those who heard that Polycarp had been arrested.
 Νext ἠρώτα ὁ ἀνθύπατος εἰ αὐτὸς εἴη Πολύκαρπος, καὶ ὁμολογήσαντος, ἔπειθεν ἀρνεῖσθαι, λέγων αἰδέσθητί σου τὴν ἡλικίαν’ καὶ ἕτερα τούτοις ἀκόλουθα, ἃ σύνηθες αὐτοῖς ἐστι λέγειν,ἴ’ ὄμοσον τὴν Καίσαρος τύχην, μετανόησον, εἰπόν, αἶρε τοὺς ἀθέους. ’
 ὁ δὲ Πολύκαρπος ἐμβριθεῖ τῷ προσώπῳ εἰς πάντα τὸν ὄχλον τὸν ἐν τῷ σταδίῳ ἐμβλέψας, ἐπισείσας αὐτοῖς τὴν χεῖρα στενάξας τε καὶ ἀναβλέψας εἰς τὸν οὐρανόν, εἶπεν αἶρε τοὺς ἀθέους.
 ἐγκειμένου δὲ τοῦ ἡγουμένου καὶ λέγοντος‘ ὄμοσον, καὶ ἀπολύσω σε, λοιδόρησον τὸν χριστόν, ’ ἔφη ὁ Πολύκαρπος‘ ὀγδοήκοντα καὶ ἓξ ἔτη δουλεύω αὐτῷ, καὶ οὐδέν με ἠδίκησεν·
 καὶ πῶς δύναμαι βλασφημῆσαι τὸν βασιλέα μου, τὸν σώσαντά με; ’
 ἐπιμένοντος δὲ πάλιν αὐτοῦ καὶ λέγοντοςἴ’ ‘ ὄμοσον τὴν Καίσαρος τύχην,’ ὁ Πολύκαρπος‘ εἰ κενοδοξεῖς, ’ φησίν, ἵνα ὀμόσω τὴν Καίσαρος τύχην, ὡς λέγεις προσποιούμενος ἀγνοεῖν ὅστις εἰμί, μετὰ παρρησίας ἄκουε·
 Χριστιανός εἰμι.
 εἰ δὲ θέλεις τὸν τοῦ Χριστιανισμοῦ μαθεῖν λόγον, δὸς ἡμέραν καὶ ἄκουσον. ’
 ἔφη ὁ ἀνθύπατος‘ πεῖσον τὸν δῆμον.’
 Πολύκαρπος ἔφη, ‘ σὲ μὲν καὶ λόγου ἠξίωκα, δεδιδάγμεθα γὰρ ἀρχαῖς καὶ ἐξουσίαις ὑπὸ θεοῦ τεταγμέναις τιμὴν κατὰ τὸ προσῆκον τὴν μὴ τεταγμέναις ἡμᾶς ἀπονέμειν·
 ἐκείνους δὲ οὐκ ἀξίους ἡγοῦμαι τοῦ ἀπολογεῖσθαι αὐτοῖς. ’
 ὁ δ’ ἀνθύπατος εἶπεν‘ θηρία ἔχω·
 τούτοις ἄε παραβαλῶ, ἐὰν μὴ μετανοήσῃς. ’
 ὁ δὲ εἶπεν κάλει·
 ἀμετάθετος γὰρ ἡμῖν ἡ ἀπὸ τῶν κρειττόνων ἐπὶ τὰ χείρω μετάνοια, καλὸν δὲ μετατίθεσθαι ἀπὸ τῶν χαλεπῶν ἐπὶ τὰ δίκαια. ’
 ὁ δὲ πάλιν πρὸς αὐτόν πυρί ἄε ποιήσω δαμασθῆναι, when he approached the proconsul asked him ifhe were Ροlycarp, and whenhe admitted it he tried to persuade him to deny, saying:
‘ Respect your age,’and so forth, as thcyare accustomed tosay:
‘ Swear hy the geniusof Caesar, repent, say:
“ Αway with the Αtheists’’’;
 but Ροlycarp, with astem countenance looked οn all the crowdin the arena, and waving his hand at them, he groaned and looked up to heaven and said:
‘ Αway with the Αtheists.’
 But whentheGovernor pressed himand said:
‘ Take the oath andI will let you go, revile Christ,’ Polycarp said:
‘ For eightyandsix years haveI becn his servant, and hehas done meno wrong, and how canI blaspheme my Kingwho saved me?’ nut whenhepersisted again, and said:
‘ Swear by the genius1 of Caesar,’ he said:
‘ If you vainlysuppose thatIwill swear by the genius of Caesar, as yousay, and pretend that you are ignorant who 1am, listen plainly:
I am a Christian.
 Αnd if you wish to leam the doctrine of Christianity fixa day and listen.’
 The proconsul said:
 ‘ Ρersuade the people.’
 Αnd Ροlycarp said:
‘ youI should heldworthyοf ffiseussion, for we have been taught to render honour, as is meet, if ithurtus not, to princes and authorities appointed by God;
 but as for those,I do not count them worthy thata defence shouldbe made to them.’
 Αnd the proconsulsaid:
 ‘I wild beasts,I will deliver you to them, unless you change your mind.’
 Αnd he said:
‘ Call for for change of mind from better to worse isa change we may not make;
 but it is good to change from eril to righteousness.’
 Αnd he said againto him:
 him:
 ἐὰν τῶν θηρίων καταφρονῇς, ἐὰν μὴ μετανοήσῃς. ’
 Πολύκαρπος εἶπεν‘ πῦρ ἀπειλεῖς πρὸς ὥραν καιόμενον καὶ μετ’ ὀλίγον σβεννύμενον·
 ἀγνοεῖς γὰρ τὸ τῆς μελλούσης κρίσεως καὶ αἰωνίου κολάσεως τοῖς ἀσεβέσι τηρούμενον πῦρ.
 ἀλλὰ τί βραδύνεις;
 φέρε δ’ βούλει. ’
 ταῦτα δὲ καὶ ἕτερα πλείονα λέγων, θάρσους καὶ χαρᾶς ἐνεπίμπλατο καὶ τὸ πρόσωπον αὐτοῦ χάριτος ἐπληροῦτο, ὥστε μὴ μόνον μὴ συμπεσεῖν ταραχθέντα ὑπὸ τῶν λεγομένων πρὸς αὐτόν, ἀλλὰ τοὐναντίον τὸν ἀνθύπατον ἐκατῆναι πέμψαι τε τὸν κήρυκα καὶ ἐν μέσῳ τῷ σταδίῳ κηρῦξαι ‘ τρὶς Πολύκαρπος ὡμολόγησεν ἑαυτὸν χριστιανὸν εἶναι. ’
 τούτου λεχθέντος ὑπὸ τοῦ κήρυκος, πᾶν τὸ πλῆθος ἐθνῶν τε καὶ Ἰουδαίων τῶν τὴν Σμύρναν κατοικούντων ἀκατασχέτῳ θυμῷ καὶ μεγάλη φωνῇ ἐβόα ‘ οὗτός ἐστιν ὁ τῆς Λαίας διδάσκαλος, ὁ πατὴρ τῶν Χριστιανῶν, ὁ τῶν ἡμετέρων θεῶν καθαιρέτης, ὁ πολλοὺς διδάσκων μὴ θύειν μηδὲ προσκυνεῖν. ’
 ταῦτα λέγοντες, ἐπεβόων καὶ ἠρώτων τὸν ἀσιάρχην Φίλιππον ἵνα ἐπαφῇ τῷ Πολυκάρπῳ λέοντα·
 ὁ δὲ ἔφη μὴ εἷναι ἐξὸν αὐτῷ ἐπειδὴ πεπληρώκει τὰ κυνηγέσια.
 τότε ἔδοξεν αὐτοῖς ὁμοθυμαδὸν ἐπιβοῆσαι ὥστε ζῶντα τὸν Πολύκαρπον κατακαῦσαι.
 ἔδει γὰρ τὸ τῆς φανερωθείσης αὐτῷ ἐπὶ τοῦ πρόσ’ κεφαλαίου ὀπτασίας πληρωθῆναι, ὅτε ἰδὼν αὐτὸ καιόμενον προσευχόμενος, εἶπεν ἐπιστραφεὶς τοῖς μετ’ αὐτοῦ πιστοῖς προφητικῶς δεῖ με ζῶντα καῆναι. ’
 ταῦτα οὗν μετὰ τοσούτου τάχους ἐγένετο θᾶττον ἢ ἐλέγετο, τῶν ὄχλων παραχρῆμα συναγόντων ἐκ τῶν ἐργαστηρίων καὶ ἐκ τῶν βαλανείων ξύλα καὶ φρύγανα, μάλιστα Ἰουδαίων will cause you to be consumedby fire, if youdespisethe beasts, unless you repent.’
 But Polycarp said‘ You threaten with the fire that burns fora time, and is quickly quenched, for you do not know the fire which awaits the wicked in the judgement to come andin everlasting punishment.
 But why are you waiting? Come, do whatyou will.’
 Αnd theseand manv Other Words he was filled with courage and joy, and his faee was full of grace, so thatit not Onlydidnot fall with trouble at the things saidto him, but that the proconsul, on the other hand, was astounded and sent his herald into the midst of the arena to announce three times:
‘ Polycarp has confessed that heisa Christian.’
 When this had been saidby the herald, all the multitude of heathen and Jews living in Smgrna cried out with uncontrollable wrath and a loud Shout:
‘ This is the teacherof Asia, the fatherof the Christians, the destroyerοf our Gods, who teachesmany neither to offer saeifficenor to worship.’
 Αnd whentheysaid this, they cried out and asked Philip the Asiarch to let loosea lion on Polycarp.
 But he said he could notlegallydo this, since he had closed the sports.
 Then they found it good to cry out with one mind that he shouldburn Polycarp alive, for the vision which had appeared to him on his pillow mustbe fulffiled, ben hesawit burning, while he was praying and he turned and said prophetically phetically to thoseof the faithful who were with him,‘I murt be burnt alive.’
 These things happened with so great speed, quicker than it takesto tell, and the crowd came together immediately, and prepared wood and faggots from the workshops and baths and the Jews were extremely zealous, as προθύμως, ὡς ἔθος αὐτοῖς, εἰς ταῦτα ὑπουργούντων.
 ἀλλ’ ὅτε ἡ πυρὰ ἡτοιμάσθη, ἀποθέμενος ἑαυτῷ πάντα τὰ ἱμάτια καὶ λύσας τὴν ζώνην, ἐπειρᾶτο καὶ ὑπολύειν ἑαυτόν, μὴ πρότερον τοῦτο ποιῶν ἰὰ τὸ ἀεὶ ἕκαστον τῶν πιστῶν σπουδάζειν ὅστις τάχιον τοῦ χρωτὸς αὐτοῦ ἐφάψηται·
 ἐν παντὶ γὰρ ἀγαθῆς ἕνεκεν πολιτείας καὶ πρὸ τῆς πολιᾶς ἐκεκόσμητο.
 εὐθέως οὖν αὐτῷ περιετίθετο τὰ πρὸς τὴν πυρὰν ἡρμοσμένα ὄργανα·
 μελλόντων δὲ αὐτῶν καὶ προσηλοῦν αὐτόν, εἶπεν ἄφετέ με οὕτως·
 ὁ γὰρ διδοὺς ὑπομεῖναι τὸ πῦρ δώσει καὶ χωρὶς τῆς ὑμετέρας ἐκ τῶν ἥλων ἀσφαλείας ἀσκύλτως ἐπιμεῖναι τῆ πυρᾷ. ’
 οἱ δὲ οὐ καθήλωσαν, προσέδησαν δὲ αὐτόν.
 ὁ δ’ ὀπίσω τὰς χεῖρας ποιήσας καὶ προσδεθεὶς ὥσπερ κριὸς ἐπίσημος, ἀναφερόμενος ἐκ μεγάλου ποιμνίου ὁλοκαύτωμα δεκτὸν θεῷ παντοκράτορι, εἶπεν ὁ τοῦ ἀγαπητοῦ καὶ εὐλογητοῦ παιδός σου Ἰησοῦ χριστοῦ πατήρ, δι’ οὗ τὴν περὶ σὲ ἐπίγνωσιν εἰλήφαμεν, ὁ θεὸς ἀγγέλων καὶ δυνάμεων καὶ πάσης κτίσεως παντός τε τοῦ γένους τῶν δικαίων οἳ ζῶσιν ἐνώπιόν ἀοῦ, εὐλογῶ ἄε ὅτι ἠξίωσάς με τῆς ἡμέρας καὶ ὥρας ταύτης, τοῦ λαβεῖν μέρος ἐν ἀριθμῷ τῶν μαρτύρων ἐν τῷ ποτηρίῳ τοῦ χριστοῦ σου εἰς ἀνάστασιν ζωῆς αἰωνίου ψυχῆς τε καὶ σώματος ἐν ἀφθαρσίᾳ πνεύματος ἁγίου·
 ἐν οἷς προσδεχθείην ἐνώπιόν σου σήμερον ἐν θυσίᾳ πίονι καὶ προσδεκτῇ, καθὼς προητοίμασας, προφανερώσας καὶ πληρώσας ὁ ἀψευδὴς καὶ ἀληθινὸς θεός.
 διὰ τοῦτο καὶ περὶ πάντωνἀὲ αἰνῶ, ἀὲ εὐλογῶ, σὲ δοξάζω διὰ τοῦ αἰωνίου ἀρχιερέως Ἰησοῦ Χριστοῦ τοῦ ἀγαπητοῦis their custom, in assisting at this.
 Now when the fire was ready he put offall his clothes, and loosened his girdle and tried aho to take ὂπ his shoes,a thing he was notusedto doing, because eaeh οf the faithful was always zealous, which of them might the more quickly toueh his flesh.
 For he had been treated with all respect because of his noble life, even before his οld age.
 Immeffiately, therefore,he was fastened to the instruments which had been prepared for the fire, but when they were going to nail him as well he said:
 ‘ Leave me thus, for Ηe who gives me power to endure the fire, will grant me to remain in the flames unmoved even without the security you will give by the nails.’
 so theydid not hailhutbound him,and he puthis hands behindhimandwas hound, as a noble ram that is offeredoutofa great flockasa whole burnt offering acceptable to Almighty God;
 and he said:
 ‘O Father of thy belovedandblessed Child, Jesus Christ, through whomwe have received full knowledge of thee, the God of angels and powers, and of all creation, and οf the whole family οf the righteous, who live before thee !I bless thee, that Thou hast granted me this day and hour, thatΙmay share, among the number οf the martyrs, in the cup οf thy Christ, for the Resurrection to everlasting life, both of soul and bodyin the immortality oftheΗοly Spirit.
 Αnd may 1, to- day be received amongthem bcfore Thee, as a rich and acceptable sacrifice, as Thou, the God who lies notandis truth, hast prepared beforehand,and shown forth, and fulnlled.
 For this reason1 also praise Thee for all things,I bless Thee, 1 glorify Thee through the everlasting and heavenly high priest, Jesus Christ, thy beloved Child, through σου παιδός, δι’ οὗ σοι σὺν αὐτῷ ἐν πνεύματι ἁγίῳ δόξα καὶ νῦν καὶ εἰς τοὺς μέλλοντας αἰῶνας, ἀμήν.’
 ἀναπέμψαντος δὲ αὐτοῦ τὸ ἀμὴν καὶ πληρώσαντος τὴν προσευχήν, οἱ τοῦ πυρὸς ἄνθρωποι ἐξῆψαν τὸ πῦρ, μεγάλης δὲ ἐκλαμψάσης φλογὸς θαῦμα εἴδομεν οἷς ἰδεῖν ἐδόθη, οἳ καὶ ἐτηρήθησαν εἰς τὸ ἀναγγεῖλαι τοῖς λοιποῖς τὰ γενόμενα.
 τὸ γὰρ πῦρ καμάρας εἶδος ποιῆσαν ὥσπερ ὀθόνης πλοίου ὑπὸ πνεύματος πληρουμένης, κύκλῳ περιετείχισε τὸ σῶμα τοῦ μάρτυρος, καὶ ἢν μέσον οὐχ ὡς σὰρξ καιομένη, ἀλλ’ ὡς χρυσὸς καὶ ἄργυρος ἐν καμίνῳ πυρούμενος·
 καὶ γὰρ εὐωδίας τοσαύτης ἀντελαβόμεθα ὡς λιβανωτοῦ πνέοντος ἢ ἄλλου τινὸς τῶν τιμίων ἀρωμάτων.
 πέρας γοῦν ἰδόντες οἱ ἄνομοι μὴ δυνάμενον τὸ σῶμα ὑπὸ τοῦ πυρὸς δαπανηθῆναι, ἐκέλευσαν προσελθόντα αὐτῷ κομφέκτορα πάρα·
 βῦσαι ξίφος, καὶ τοῦτο ποιήσαντος, ἐξῆλθεν πλῆθος αἵματος, ὥστε κατασβέσαι τὸ πῦρ καὶ θαυμάσαι πάντα τὸν ὄχλον εἰ τοσαύτη τις διαφορὰ μεταξὺ τῶν τε ἀπίστων καὶ τῶν ἐκλεκτῶν·
 ὧν εἰς καὶ οὗτος γέγονεν ὁ θαυμασιώτατος ἐν τοῖς καθ’ ἡμᾶς χρόνοις διδάσκαλος ἀποστολικὸς καὶ προφητικὸς γενόμενος ἐπίσκοπος τῆς ἐν Σμύρνῃ καθολικῆς ἐκκλησίας·
 πᾶν γὰρ ῥῆμα ὃ ἀφῆκεν ἐκ τοῦ στόματος κὐτοῦ, καὶ ἐτελειώθη καὶ τελειωθήσεται.
 Ὁ δὲ ἁντίζηλος καὶ βάσκανος πονηρός, ὁ ἀντικείμενος τῷ γένει τῶν δικαίων, ἰδὼν τὸ μέγεθος αὐτοῦ τῆς μαρτυρίας καὶ τὴν ἀπ’ ἀρχῆς ἀνεπίληπτον πολιτείαν ἐστεφανωμένον τε τὸν τῆς ἀφθαρσίας στέφανον καὶ βραβεῖον ἀναντίρρητον ἀπενηνεγμένον, ἐπετήδευσεν ὡς μηδὲ τὸ σωμάτιον αὐτοῦ ὑφ’ ἡμῶν ληφθείη, καίπερ πολλῶν ἔπι.
 whom be glory to Thee with Him and the Ηοly Spirit, both now and for the ages that areto come, Amen.
 Now when he had uttered his Αmen and finished his prayer, the menin charge of the nrelit it, and a great flame blazedupand we, to whom it was given to sce, saw a marvel.
 Αnd we have been preserved to report to others what befell.
 For the fire made the likenessofa room, like the sail οfa vessel Rned with wind,and surrounded the body οf the martyr as witha wall,and he was within it notas burning flesh, but as gold and silver being refined in a furnace.
 Αnd we perceived sueh a fragrant smell as the scentofincense or othercostly spices.
 Αt length the lawless men, seeing that his body could not be consumedbythe nre, commanded an execcutioner to go up and stab him witha dagger, and whenhe ffidld this, there came out much blood, so thatthenre was quenched, and allthe crowd marvelled that therewas sucha difference betweentheunbelievers and the elect.
 Αnd of the elect was he indeed one, the wondertul martyr, Ρolyearp,who in οur days was an apostolicand prophetic teacher, bishop of the Catholic Church in Smyrna.
 For every word which he urtered from his mouth both was fulfilled and willbe fulfilled.
 But the jealous and envious evil one who resists the family of the righteous, when he saw the greatnessofhis martyrdom, and his blameless career from the beginning, and thathe was crowned with the crown of immortality, and had carried off the unspeakable prize, took care that not even his poor body should be taken away by us, though many θυμούντων τοῦτο ποιῆσαι καὶ κοινωνῆσαι τῷ ἁγίῳ αὐτοῦ σαρκίῳ.
 ὑπέβαλον γοῦν τινες Νικήτην, τὸν ἴ’ τοῦ Ἡρωδου πατέρα, ἀδελφὸνδ’ Ἄλκης, ἐντυχεῖν τῷ ἡγεμόνι ὥστε μὴ δοῦναι αὐτοῦ τὸ σῶμα, μή,’ φησίν,ἴ’ ἀφέντες τὸν ἐσταυρωμένον, τοῦτον ἄρξωνται σέβειν.’
 καὶ ταῦτα εἶπον ὑποβαλόντων καὶ ἐνισχυσάντων τῶν Ἰουδαίων·
 οἳ καὶ ἐτήρησαν μελλόντων ἡμῶν ἐκ τοῦ πυρὸς αὐτὸν λαμβάνειν, ἀγνοοῦντες ὅτι οὔτε τὸν χριστόν ποτε λαμβάνειν, δυνησόμεθα, τὸν ὑπὲρ τῆς τοῦ παντὸς κόσμου τῶν σῳζομένων σωπηρίας παθόντα, οὔτε ἕτερόν τινα σέβειν.
 τοῦτον μὲν γὰρ υἱὸν ὄντα τοῦ θεοῦ προσκυνοῦμεν, τοὺς δὲ μάρτυρας ὡς μαθητὰς καὶ μιμητὰς τοῦ κυρίου ἀγαπῶμεν ἀξίως ἕνεκα εὐνοίας ἀνυπερβλήτου τῆς εἰς τὸν ἴδιον βασιλέα καὶ διδάσκαλον·
 ὧν γένοιτο καὶ ἡμᾶς συγκοινωνούς τε καὶ συμμαθητὰς γενέσθαι.
 ἰδὼν οὗν ὁ ἑκατοντάρχης τὴν τῶν Ἰουδαίων γενομένην φιλονεικίαν, θεὶς αὐτὸν ἐν μέσῳ, ὡς ἔθος αὐτοῖς, ἔκαυσεν, οὕτως τε ἡμεῖς ὕστερον ἀνελόμενοι τὰ τιμιώτερα λίθων πολυτελῶν καὶ δοκιμώτερα ὑπὲρ χρυσίον ὀστᾶ αὐτοῦ ἀπεθέμεθα ὅπου καὶ ἀκόλουθον ἦν.
 ἔνθα, ὡς δυνατόν, ἡμῖν συναγομένοις ἐν ἀγαλλιάσει καὶ χαρᾷ παρέξει ὁ κύριος ἐπιτελεῖν τὴν τοῦ μαρτυρίου αὐτοῦ ἡμέραν γενέθλιον εἴς τε τὴν τῶν προηθληκότων μνήμην καὶ τῶν μελλόντων ἄσκησίν τε καὶ ἑτοιμασίαν.
 τοιαῦτα τὰ κατὰ τὸν μακάριον Πολύκαρπον·
 σὺν τοῖς ἀπὸ Φιλαδελφείας δωδέκάτου ἐν Σμύρνη μαρτυρήσαντος, ὃς μόνος ὑπό πάντων μᾶλλον μνημονεύεται, ὡς καὶ ὑπὸ τῶν ἐθνῶν ἐν παντὶ τόπω λαλεῖσθαι.
” Τὰ μὲν δὴ κατὰ τὸν θαυμάσιον καὶ ἀποστολικὸν desiredto do so, and to have fellowship with his holy flesh.
 Therefore he put forward Niketas, the fatherof Ηerod, and the brother of Αlce, to ask the Governor not to givehis body,ἴ’‘ lest,,’ heἴ’ they leavethe crucffied one and beginto worship this man.’
 Αnd they saidthis owing totheand pressureof the Jews, who Watchedwhenwe were goingto take itfromthe fire, for they do not know that we shallnot ever be able either to abandon Christ, who suffered for the salvation of those Who are being saved in the whole world, or to worship any other.
 For him we worship as the Son of God, but the martyrs we love as disciples and imitators οf the Lord;
 and rightly, beeause of their unsurpassable affection toward their own King and Teacher.
 Ood grant that We too may be their companions and fellow- disciples.
 When therefore the centurion saw the contentionusness caused by the Jews, he put the bodyin the midst, aswas their custom, and burnt it.
 Thus we, at last, took up his bones, more Ρreciousthan precious stones, and hner than gold, and put them where it was meet.
 There the Lord will permit us to come together according to our power in gladness and joy, and celebrate the birthdayof his martyrdom, both inmemoryof those who have already contested, and for the Ρractice and training of those whose fate it Shall be.
 such was the lot ofthe bleSSed Polycarp, who though he was, together with those from Philadelphia, the twelfthmartyrin Smyrna,is alone especially remembered by all, so thatheis spoken ofinevery place, even by the heathen.
” This great end Was vouchSafed to the lifeof the Πολύκαρπον τοιούτου κατηξίωτο τέλους, τῶν κατὰ τὴν Σμυρναίων ἐκκλησίαν ἀδελφῶν τὴν ἱστορίαν ἐν ᾗ δεδηλώκαμεν αὐτῶν ἐπιστολῇ κατατεθειμένων·
 ἐν τῆ αὐτῇ δὲ περὶ αὐτοῦ γραφῆ καὶ ἄλλα μαρτύρια συνῆπτο κατὰ τὴν αὐτὴν Σμύρναν πεπραγμένα ὑπὸ τὴν αὐτὴν περίοδον τοῦ χρόνου τῆς τοῦ Πολυκάρπου μαρτυρίας, μεθ’ ὧν καἰ Μητρόδωρος τῆς κατὰ Μαρκίωνα πλάνης πρεσβύτερος δὴ εἶναι δοκῶν πυρὶ παραδοθεὶς ἀνῄρηται.
 τῶν γε μὴν τότε περιβόητος μάρτυς εἷς τις ἔγνω.
 ρίζετο Πιόνιος·
 οὗ τὰς κατὰ μέρος ὁμολογίας τὴν τε τοῦ λόγου παρρησίαν καὶ τὰς ὑπὲρ τῆς πίστεως ἐπὶ τοῦ δήμου καὶ τῶν ἀρχόντων ἀπολογίας διδασκαλικάς τε δημηγορίας καὶ ἔτι τὰς πρὸς τοὺς ὑποπεπτωκότας τῷ κατὰ τὸν διωγμὸν πειρασμῷ δεξιώσεις παραμυθίας τε ἃς ἐπὶ τῆς εἱρκτῆς τοῖς παρ’ αὐτὸν εἰσαφικνουμένοις ἀδελφοῖς παρετίθετο, ἅς τε ἐπὶ τούτοις ὑπέμεινεν βασάνους, καὶ τὰς ἐπὶ ταύταις ἀλγηδόνας καθηλώσεις τε καὶ τὴν ἐπὶ τῆς πυρᾶς καρτερίαν τήν τε ἐφ’ ἅπασιν τοῖς παραδόξοις αὐτοῦ τελευτὴν πληρέστατα τῆς περὶ αὐτοῦ γραφῆς περιεχούσης, τοὺς οἷς φίλον ἐπὶ ταύτην ἀναπέμψομεν τοῖς τῶν ἀρχαίων συναχθεῖσιν ἡμῖν μαρτυρίοις ἐντεταγμένην.
 ἑξῆς δὲ καὶ ἄλλων ἐν Περγάμῳ πόλει τῆς Ἀσίας ὑπομνήματα μεμαρτυρηκότων φέρεται, Κάρπου καὶ Παπύλου καὶ γυναικὸς Ἀγαθονίκης, μετὰ πλείστας καὶ διαπρεπεῖς ὁμολογίας ὁμολογίας ἐπιδόξως τετελειωμένων.
 XVI.
 Κατὰ τούτους δὲ καὶ ὁ μικρῷ πρόσθεν ἡμῖν δηλωθεὶς Ιουστῖνος δεύτερον ὑπὲρ τῶν καθ’ ἡμᾶς δογμάτων βιβλίον ἀναδοὺς τοῖς δεδηλωμένοις ἄρχουσιν, θείῳ κατακοσμεῖται μαρτυρίῳ, Φιλοσόφου marvellousand apostolic Polycarp, as the Christians of the church at Smyrna have given the story in their Ietter which we have quoted.
 In the samedocument concerning him other martyrdoms are appended which took place in the same Smyrna at the same time as the martyrdom of Polycarp, and among them Metrodorus, who seems to have been a presbyter of the Marcionite error, was given to the fire and put to death.
 Α famous martyr of those at that time was Pionius.
 The document concerning him givesa full aceount ofhis speeial confession, his boldness of speech, the instructive apologies for the faith and popular addresses before the people and magistrates, as well as the correction and comfort to those who had succumbed to temptation in the persecution, which he addressed during his imprisonment to the brethrenwho visited him, in adffition to this the tortures which he underwent, added to pain, nailing,the enduring of the name, and, after all his marvellous deeds, his death;
 and to it we will refer those interested, for it is ineluded in the martyrdoms of the ancients colleeted by us.
 1 There are also memoirs extantof οthers who were martyred in the cityof Ρergamοn in Αsia, Carpus and Ρapylas, andawoman, Agathounice, who died after many glorious confessions.
 XVI.
 In their timetoo Justin, 2 whom we mentioneda little earlier, after delivering to the rulers mentioneda second book in behalf of our οpinions, was adorned with divine martyrdom when the philosopher προσηγορίᾳ τὸν φερώνυμονδ’ οὗτος τῇ κυνικὴ προσηγορίᾳ βίον τε καὶ τρόπον ἐξήλου) τὴν ἐπι- βουλὴν αὐτῷ καττύσαντος, ἐπειδὴ πλεονάκις ἐν διαλόγοις ἀκροατῶν παρόντων εὐθύνας αὐτόν, τὰ νικητήρια τελευτῶν ἧς ἐπρέσβευεν ἀληθείας διὰ τοῦ μαρτυρίου τοῦ κατ’ αὐτὸν ἀνεδήσατο.
 Τοῦτο δὲ καὶ αὐτὸς ὁ ταῖς ἀληθείαις Φιλοσοφώτατος ἐν τῆ δεδηλωμένη ἀπολογίᾳ σαφῶς οὕτως, ὥσπερ οὖν καὶ ἔμελλεν δάον οὔπω περὶ αὐτὸν συμβήσεσθαι, προλαβὼν ἀποσημαίνει τού.
 τοῖς τοῖς ῥήμασιν·
“ κἀγὼ οὖν προσδοκῶ ὑπό τινος τῶν ὠνομασμένων ἐπιβουλευθῆναι καὶ ξύλῳ ἐντιναγῆναι ἢ κἂν ὑπὸ Κρήσκεωτος τοῦ ἀφιλοσόφου καὶ Φιλοκόμπου·
 οὐ γὰρ φιλόσοφον εἰπεῖν ἄξιον τὸν ἄνδρα, ὅς γε περὶ ὧν μὴ ἐπίσταται, δημοσίᾳ καταμαρτυρεῖ ὡς ἀθέων καὶ ἀσεβῶν Χριστιανῶν ὄντων, πρὸς χάριν καὶ ἡδονὴν τῶν πολλῶν τῶν πεπλανημένων τοῦτο πράττων.
 εἴτε γὰρ μὴ ἐντυχὼν τοῖς τοῦ Χριστοῦ διδάγμασιν κατατρέχει ἡμῶν, παμπόνηρός ἐστιν καὶ ἰδιωτῶν πολὺ χείρων, οἳ φυλάττονται πολλάκις περὶ ὧν οὐκ ἐπίστανται, διαλέγεσθαι καὶ ψευδομαρτυρεῖν·
 καὶ εἰ ἐντυχὼν μὴ συνῆκεν τὸ ἐν αὐτοῖς μεγαλεῖον ἢ συνεὶς πρὸς τὸ μὴ ὑποπτευθῆναι τοιοῦτος ταῦτα ποιεῖ, πολὺ μᾶλλον ἀγεννὴς καὶ παμπόνηρος, ἰδιωτικῆς καὶ ἀλόγου δόξης καὶ φόβου ἐλάττων ὤν.
 καὶ γὰρ προθέντα με καὶ ἐρωτήσαντα αὐτὸν ἐρωτήσεις τινὰς τοιαύτας, μαθεῖν καὶ ἐλέγξαι ὅτι ἀληθῶς μηδὲν ἐπ΄ισταται, εἰδέναι ὑμᾶς βούλομαι, καὶ ὅτι ἀληθῆ λέγω, εἰ μὴ ἀνηνέχθησαν ὑμῖν αἱ κοινωνίαι τῶν λόγων, ἕτοιμος καὶ ἐφ’ ὑμῶν Crescens, who strove in life and behaviour to justify the name of cynic which he bore, instigated the plot against him, for Justin had often dereated him in debate in the presence of hearers, and finally bound on himself the trophies of victory by his martyrdom for the truth of which he was an ambassador.
 This he, who was in trutha supreme philosopher, sets in advance, in.
 the above- mentioned Apology, just as clearly as in fact it was almost at once to happento him, using these words:
“Ι too expect to be plotted against by one of those who have been mentioned, and to be stretchedon the raek, or evenby Crescens, that lover not of wisdom but of boasting, for theman is not worthytobe called‘ philosopher’seeing that he publiclytestifies what hedoesnot know, to the effect that the Christiansareatheists and impious, aud he does this to gain the grace and pleasure of the many who have been deceived.
 For either he controverts us without attending to the teachingsof Christ, and isa complete rascal and far worse than the uneducated, who often avoid discussing and giving false testimony on subjects jects of which they have no knowledge;
 and if he has studied and does not understand the greatnessin them, or though be does understand them is base enough to do what he does to avoid suspicion, he is more ignoble and rescally, for he succumbs to ignorant and unreasonable opinion and fear.
 ForI would have you to know thatΙ put forward and asked him certain questions Of this kind in order to find out and prove that he really knows nothing;
 and to show thatIam speaking the truth, in case the informationato the argumentswas not broughtto you,Ι am readu tocommunicate the κοινωνεῖν τῶν ἐρωτήσεων πάλιν·
 βασιλικὸν δ’ ἂν καὶ τοῦτο ἔργον εἴη.
 εἰ δὲ καὶ ἐγνώσθησαν ὑμῖν αἱ ἐρωτήσεις μου καὶ αἱ ἐκείνου ἀποκρίσεις, φανερὸν ὑμῖν ἐστιν ὅτι οὐδὲν τῶν ἡμετέρων ἐπί.
 σταται·
 ἢ εἰ ἐπίσταται, διὰ τοὺς ἀκούοντας δὲ οὐ τολμᾷ λέγειν, ὡς πρότερον ἔφην, οὐ φιλόσοφος, ἀλλὰ φιλόδοξος ἁνὴρ δείκνυται, ὅς γε μηδὲ τὸ Σωκρατικόν, ἀξιέραστον ὄν, τιμᾷ.
” Ταῦτα μὲν οὗν ὁ Ἰουστῖνος·
 ὅτι δὲ κατὰ τὴν αὐτοῦ πρόρρησιν πρὸς τοῦ Κρήσκεντος συσκευασθεὶς ἐτελειώθη, Τατιανός, ἀνὴρ τὸν πρῶτον αὐτοῦ βίον σοφιστεύσας ἐν τοῖς Ἑλλήνων μαθήμασι καὶ δόξαν οὐ σμικρὰν ἐν αὐτοῖς ἀπενηνεγμένος πλεῖστά τε ἐν αυγγράμμασιν αὐτοῦ καταλιπὼν μνημεῖα, ἐν τῷ Πρὸς Ἕλληνας ἱστορεῖ, λέγων ὧδε·
“ καὶ ὁ θαυμασιώτατος Ἰουστῖνος ὀρθῶς ἐξεφώνησεν ἐοικέναι τοὺς προειρημένους λῃσταῖς.
” εἶτ’ ἔπει.
 πών τινα περὶ τῶν Φιλοσόφων, ἐπιλέγει ταῦτα·
 ‘ Κρήσκης γοῦν ὁ ἐννεοττεύσας τῇ μεγάλη πόλει παιδεραστίᾳ μὲν πάντας ὑπερήνεγκεν, φιλαργυρίᾳ δὲ πάνυ προσεχὴς ἦν·
 θανάτου δὲ ὁ καταφρονεῖν συμβουλεύων οὕτως αὐτὸς ἐδεδίει τὸν θάνατον, ὡς καὶ Ἰουστῖνον, καθάπερ μεγάλῳ κακῷ, τῷ θανάτῳ περιβαλεῖν πραγματεύσασθαι, διότι κηρύττων τὴν ἀλήθειαν λίχνους τοὺς φιλοσόφους καὶ ἀπατεῶνας συνἠλεγχεν.
” καὶ τὸ μὲν κατὰ Ἰουστῖνον μαρτύριον τοιαύτην εἴληχεν αἰτίαν.
 XVII.
 ‘ O δ’ αὐτὸς ἀνὴρ πρὸ τοῦ κατ’ αὐτὸν ἀγῶ.
 νος ἑτέρων πρὸ αὐτοῦ μαρτυρησάντων ἐν τῆ προτέρᾳ μνημονεύει ἀπολογίᾳ, χρησίμως τῆ ὑποθέσει καὶἴ’ ταῦτα ἱστορῶν·
 γράφει δὲ ὧδε·
“ γυνἠ τις συνεβίου ἀνδρὶ ἀκολασταίνοντι, ἀκολασταίνουσα καὶ αὐτὴ questions again before you, and this would be a task worthy οf an Εmperοr.
 But if my questions and ffihls answers are knownto you, it is plain to you that he knows nothing of our position, or, if he does know, does not dare say so becauseofthe listeners, and, as1 said before, is provedtobea man loves loves not wisdombut reputation and does not even honour the saying of socrates, worthy of affection as it is.
 ” 1 So says Justin;
 and that, according tohis own prophecy, he was caught by Crescens and suffered martyrdom, Tatian,a man Who in eariy life was trained in the learning of the Greeks and gained great distinction in it and has left many monuments of himself in writing, narrates as follows in his treatise against the Greeks:
“ Αnd the wonderful Justin rightly exclaimed that those mentinoned are like brigands.
” Then continutingabout the philosophers, he proceeds:
“ Crescens, who lurked in the great city, surpassed all in unnatural rice and was also wholly devoted to the love οf money.
 Ηe counselled others to despise death but himself was so afraid οf it thathe intrigued to inffictdeathon Justin,as though it werea great evil, because Justinby preaching the truth convicted the philosophers as gluttons and” such was the cause οf the marthyrdom of Justin.
 XVII.
 The same writer mentions in his first Αpology that before his own contest οthers had been martyrs berore him.
 Ηe narrates this prohtablyto our sub;
 eet and he writes thus:
“Α certain woman lived witha ffissipated husband, and at Rrst she too πρότερον·
 ἐπειδὴ δὲ τὰ τοῦ χριστοῦ διδάγματα ἔγνω, ἐσωφρονίσθη, καὶ τὸν ἄνδρα ὁμοίως σωφρονεῖν πείθειν ἐπειρᾶτο, τὰ διδάγματα ἀναφέρουσα τήν τε μέλλουσαν τοῖς οὐ σωφρόνως καὶ μετὰ λόγου ὀρθοῦ βιοῦσιν ἕσεσθαι ἐν αἰωνίῳ πυρὶ κόλασιν ἀπαγγέλλουσα.
 ὁ δὲ ταῖς αὐταῖς ἀσελγείαις ἐπιμένων, ἀλλοτρίαν διὰ τῶν πράξεων ἐποιεῖτο τὴν γαμετήν·
 ἀσεβὲς γὰρ ἡγουμένη τὸ λοιπὸν ἡ γυνὴ συγκατακλίνεσθαι ἀνδρὶ παρὰ τὸν τῆς Φύσεως νόμον καὶ παρὰ τὸ δίκαιον πόρους ἡδονῆς ἐκ παντὸς πειρωμένῳ ποιεῖσθαι, τῆς συζυγίας Χωρισθῆναι ἐβουλήθη.
 καὶ ἐπειδὴ ἐξ- εδυσωπεῖτο ὑπὸ τῶν αὐτῆς, ἔτι προσμένειν συμβουλευόντων ὡς εἰς ἐλπίδα μεταβολῆς ἥξοντός ποτε τοῦ ἀνδρός, βιαζομένη ἑαυτὴν ἐπέμενεν·
 ἐπειδὴ δὲ ὁ ταύτης ἀνὴρ εἰς τὴν Ἀλεξάνδρειαν πορευθείς, χαλεπώτερα πράττειν ἀπηγγέλθη, ὅπως μὴ κοινωνὸς τῶν ἀδικημάτων καὶ ἀσεβημάτων γένηται μένουσα ἐν τῇ συζυγίᾳ καὶ ὁμοδίαιτος καὶ ὁμόκοιτος γινομένη, τὸ λεγόμενον παρ’ ὑμῖν ῥεπούδιον δοῦσα ἐχωρίσθη.
 ὁ δὲ καλὸς κἀγαθὸς ταύτης ἀνήρ, δέον αὐτὸν χαίρειν ὅτι ἃ πάλαι μετὰ τῶν ὑπηρετῶν καὶ τῶν μισθοφόρων εὐχερῶς ἔπραττεν μέθαις χαίρουσα καὶ κακίᾳ πάση, τούτων μὲν τῶν πράξεων πέπαυτο καὶ αὐτὸν τὰ αὐτὰ παύσασθαι πράττοντα ἐβούλετο, μὴ βουλομένου ἀπαλλαγείσης, κατηγορίαν πεποίηται, λέγων αὐτὴν Χριστιανὴν εἶναι.
 καὶ ἡ μὲν βιβλίδιόν ἀοῖ τῷ αὐτοκράτορι ἀνέδωκεν, πρότερον συγχωρηθῆναι αὐτῇ διοικήσαθαι τὰ ἑαυτῆς ἀξιοῦσα, ἔπειτα ἀπολογήσασθαι περὶ τοῦ κατηγορήματος μετὰ τὴν τῶν πραγμάτων αὐτῆς διοίκησιν, καὶ συν- was dissipated, but when she knew the doctrine of Christshe reformed,and tried topersuadeher husband to reform likewise, relating thedoctrine to him,and announcing the punishmentin eternal fire whieh will be the lot of those who do not live Soberiy and in aceordanee with right teaching.
 But he remained in his dissoluteness, and through his acts broke uphis marriage,for his wife thought it was wicked to continue consorting witha husband who tried every kind of pleasure contrary to the law of nature and to righteousness, and wished to be separated from wedlock.
 Owing to the importunity ofher family,who counselled her to stay with him because there Was always a hope that thehusband would change, She constrained herself to stay with him, but when her husband Went to Alexandria, and she heard that he was behaving worse, in order notto be a partner of wickedness and impiety by remanining in wedlock and and sharing in his board and bed, she gave him What you call a Writ of divorce and was separated.
 But though her noble husband ought to have rejoiced that she, who had formerly light- heartedly engaged with servants and hirelings in drunken pleasure andin all vices, had given up theSe habits and wished him too to give up following them, he disliked her conversion and brought an aceusation alleging that she was a Christian.
 she ffied a petition With you,as Εmpeτor, begging that she be allowed hrSt to settle her affairs and then to answer the accusation after the Settlement of her εχώρησας τοῦτο·
 ὁ δὲ ταύτης ποτὲ ἀνὴρ πρὸς ἐκείνην μὲν μὴ δυνάμενος τὰ νῦν ἔτι λέγειν, πρὸς Πτολεμαῖόν τινα, ὃν Οὐρβίκιος ἐκολάσατο, διδάσκαλον ἐκείνης ἐκείνης τῶν Χριστιανῶν μαθημάτων γενόμενον, ἐτράπετο διὰ τοῦδε τοῦ τρόπου.
 ἑκατόνταρχον εἰς δεσμὰ ἐμβαλόντα τὸν Πτολεμαῖον, φίλον αὐτῷ ὑπάρχοντα, ἔπεισε λαβέσθαι Πτολεμαίου καὶ ἀνερωτῆσαι εἰ, αὐτὸ τοῦτο μόνον, χριστιανός ἐστιν.
 καὶ τὸν Πτολεμαῖον, φιλαλήθη ἀλλ’ οὐκ ἀπατηλὸν οὐδὲ ψευδολὀγον τὴν γνώμην ὄντα, ὁμολογήσαντα ἑαυτὸν εἶναι Χριστιανόν, ἐν δεσμοῖς γενέσθαι ὁ ἑκατόνταρχος πεποίηκεν, καὶ ἐπὶ πολὺν χρόνον ἐν τῷ δεσμωτηρίῳ ἐκολάσατο·
 τελευταῖον δὲ ὅτε ἐπὶ Οὐρβίκιον ἤχθη ὁ ἄνθρωπος, ὁμοίως αὐτὸ τοῦτο μόνον ἑξητάσθη, εἰ εἴη Χριστιανός·
 καὶ πάλιν, τὰ καλὰ ἑαυτῷ συνεπιστάμενος διὰ τὴν ἀπὸ τοῦ χριστοῦ διδαχήν, τὸ διδασκαλεῖον τῆς θείας ἀρετῆς ὡμολόγησεν.
 ὁ γὰρ ἀρνούμενος ὁτιοῦν ἢ κατεγνωκὼς τοῦ πράγματος ἔξαρνος γίνεται ἢ ἑαυτὸν ἀνάξιον ἐπιστάμενος καὶ ἀλλότριον τοῦ πράγματος τὴν ὁμολογίαν φεύγει·
 ὧν οὐδὲν πρόσεστιν τῷ ἀληθινῷ Χριστιανῷ.
 καὶ τοῦ Οὐρβικίου κεΛεύσαντος αὐτὸν ἀπαχθῆναι, Λούκιός τις, καὶ αὐτὸς ὢν Χριστιανός, ὁρῶν τὴν ἀλόγως οὕτως γενομένην κρίσιν, πρὸς τὸν Οὐρβίκιον ἔφη ‘ τίς ἢ αἰτία τοῦ μήτε μοιχὸν μήτε πόρνον μήτε ἀνδροφόνον μήτε λωποδύτην μήτε ἅρπαγα μήτε ἁπλῶς ἀδίκημά τι πράξαντα ἐλεγχόμενον, ὀνόματος affairs.
 This you granted.
 But her former husband being now unable to attack her, 1 turned in the following way against a certain Ptolemy, who had been her teacher in Christian doetrines and was punished by Urbicius.
 Ηe perSuadeda centurion Whowasa friend ofhisto arrest Ptolemy, and to ask himthiSone thing, Whether he wasa ChriStian.
 Αnd Ptolemy, being a lover of the truth,and not deceitfulnorof false disposition, confessed that he wasa Christian.
 The centurion caused him to be put in prison and tortured him fora long While in the jail.
 Finally, when the man was brought before Urbicius he Was Similarly asked only this Same question, whether he wasa Christian, and again, conscious ofthe good whieh came to him because οf the teaching of Christ, he confeSsedthe School of divine virtue.
 For he Who denieS anything either condemns the fact and rejects it, or knowing that he is himself unvorthy and alienfrom the faet, avoids confession, and neither of these is the caSe vith the real Christian.
 When Urbicius ordered him to be executed,a certain Lucius, who was himself a Christian, seeing the verdict which was thus given contrary toall reason,said to Urbicius,‘ What is the reason for punishing this man who has not been convicted of adulteiy or fornieation or murder or theft or robbery or, ina word, of having done anything δὲ Χριστιανοῦ προσωνυμίαν ὁμολογοῦντα, τὸν ἄνθρωπον τοῦτον ἐκολάσω;
 οὐ πρέποντα Εὐσεβεῖ αὐτοκράτορι οὐδὲ φιλοσόφῳ Καίσαρος παιδὶ οὐδὲ ἱερᾷ συγκλήτῳ κρίνεις, ὦ Οὐρβίκιε.’
 καὶ ὅς, οὐδὲν ἄλλο ἀποκρινάμενος, καὶ πρὸς τὸν Λούκιον ἔφη δοκεῖς μοι καὶ αὖ εἶναι τοιοῦτος,’ καὶ τοῦ Λουκίου φήσαντος‘ μάλιστα,’ πάλιν καὶ αὐτὸν ἀπαχθῆναι ἐκέλευσεν·
 ὁ δὲ χάριν εἰδέναι ὡμολόγει·
 πονηρῶν γὰρ δεσποτῶν τῶν τοιούτων ἀπηλλάχθαι ἐπεῖπεν καὶ παρὰ ἀγαθὸν πατέρα καὶ βασιλέα τὸν θεὸν πορεύεσθαι.
 καὶ ἄλλος δὲ τρίτος ἐπελθὼν κολασθῆναι προσετιμήθη.’
 ’ τούτοις ὁ Ἰουστῖνος εἰκότως καὶ ἀκολούθως ἃς προεμνημονεύσαμεν αὐτοῦ φωνὰς ἐπάγει λέγων“ κἀγὼ οὖν προσδοκῶ ὑπό τινος τῶν ὠνομασμένων ἐπιβουλευθῆναι’’ καὶ τὰ λοιπά.
 XVIII.
 Πλεῖστα δὲ οὗτος καταλέλοιπεν ἡμῖν πεπαιδευμένης διανοίας καὶ περὶ τὰ θεῖα ἐσπουδακυίας ὑπομνήματα, πάσης ὠφελείας ἔμπλεα·
 ἐφ’ ἃ τοὺς φιλομαθεῖς ἀναπέμψομεν, τὰ εἰς ἡμετέραν γνῶσιν ἐλθόντα χρησίμως παρασημηνάμενοι.
 ὁ μέν τίς ἐστιν αὐτῷ λόγος πρὸς’ Αντωνῖνον τὸν προσαγορευθέντα καὶ τοὺς τούτου παῖδας τήν τε Ῥωμαίων σύγκλητον προσφωνητικὸς ὑπὲρ τῶν καθ’ ἡμᾶς δογμάτων, ὁ δὲ δευτέραν περιέχων ὑπὲρ τῆς ἡμετέρας πίστεως ἀπολογίαν, ἢν πρὸς τὸν τοῦ δεδηλωμένου αὐτοκράτορος διάδοχόν τε καὶ ὁμώνυμον Ἀωτωνῖνον Οὐῆρον, οὗ τὰ κατὰ τοὺς χρόνους ἐπὶ τοῦ παρόντος διέξιμεν·
 καὶ ἄλλος ὁ πρὸς Ἕλληνας, ἐν ᾧ μακρὸν περὶ πλείστων παρ’ ἡμῖν τε καὶ τοῖς Ἑλλήνων φιλοσόφοις ζητουμένων κατατείνας λόγον, περὶ τῆς τῶν δαιμόνων διαλαμβάνει φύσεως·
 ἃ οὐδὲν ἄν ἐπείγοι wrong, but merely confesses that he bearsthe Christian name? Your judgement, Urbicius,is οf the emperor called Ρius, or of’s son,the philosopher,or of the sacred Senate.’
 And Urbicius made no reply except to say Ludus,‘ You seem to me to bea Chrirtian yourself.’
 Αnd when Lucius said,‘ Certainly,’ he ordered to be executed also.
 Lucius expreSsed his gratitude, for he sriald he was being removed from wicked lords like these and going to God,the good Father and King.
 Α third man, who also came forward, Urbieius οmmandedto be punished.
” To this Justinand suitably addsthe words whichwe quoted above,“ so 1 expect myselfto suffer a Ρlοt from oneofthose named,” XVIII.
 Justin has left us treatises of an educated intelligencetrainedin theology, which arefull οf helpfulness, and to them we will refer students, infficating what has come usefully to our knowledge.
 nere is a treatise by him,on behalfofour opinions, addressed to Antoninus, surnamed Pius,and his children, and tothe Roman senate another, containing asecond Αpolοgy for our defenee, which he made to the successor and namesakeof the above mentioned emperor, Antoninus Verus, whose periodweareat present discussing;
 and another to the Greeks, in which, after a long and expanded argument about very many things inquired into both by Christians and the philosophers οf the Greeks, he discourses on the nature of demons, which thereis no urgencyto quote at present.
 τὰ νῦν παρατίθεσθαι.
 καὶ αὖθις ἕτερον πρὸς Ἕλληνας εἰς ἡμᾶς ἐλήλυθεν αὐτοῦ σύγγραμμα, δ’ καὶ ἐπέγραφεν Ἕλεγχον, καὶ παρὰ τούτους ἄλλο περὶ θεοῦ μοναρχίας, ἢν οὐ μόνον ἐκ τῶν παρ’ ἡμῖν γραφῶν, ἀλλὰ καὶ τῶν Ἑλληνικῶν συνίστησιν βιβλίων·
 ἐπὶ τούτοις ἐπιγεγραμμένον Ψάλτης, καὶ ἄλλο σχολικὸν Περὶ ψυχῆς, ἐν ᾧ διαφόρους πεύσεις προτείνας περὶ τοῦ κατὰ τὴν ὑπόθεσιν προβλήματος, τῶν παρ’ Ἕλλησιν Φιλοσόφων παρατίοθεται τὰς δόξας, αἷς καὶ ἀντιλέξειν ὑπισχνεῖται τήν τε αὐτὸς αὐτοῦ δόξαν ἐν ἑτέρῳ παραθήσεσθαι συγγράμματι.
 καὶ διάλογον δὲ πρὸς Ἰουδαίους συνέταξεν, ὃν ἐπὶ τῆς Ἐφεσίων πόλεως πρὸς Τρύφωνα τῶν τότε Ἑβραίων ἐπισημότατον πεποίηται·
 ἐν ᾧ τίνα τρόπον ἡ θεία χάρις αὐτὸν ἐπὶ τὸν τῆς πίστεως παρώρμησε λόγον, δηλοῖ ὁποίαν τε πρότερον περὶ τὰ Φιλόσοφα μαθήματα σπουδὴν εἰσενήνεκται καὶ ὅσην ἐποιήσατο τῆς ἀληθείας ἐκθυμοτάτην ζήτησιν.
 ἰστορεῖ δ’ ἐν ταὐτῷ περὶ Ἰουδαίων ὡς κατὰ τῆς τοῦ Χριστοῦ διδασκαλίας ἐπιβουλὴν συσκευασαμένων, αὐτὰ ταῦτα πρὸς τὸν τὸν Τρύφωνα ἀποτεινόμενος·
“ οὐ μόνον δὲ οὐ μετενοήσατε ἐφ’ οἷς ἐπράξατε κακῶς, ἀλλὰ ἄνδρας ἐκλεκτοὺς ἐκλεξάμενοι τότε ἀπὸ Ἱερουσαλὴμ ἐξεπέμψατε εἰς πᾶσαν τὴν γῆν, λέγοντες αἵρεσιν ἄθεον χριστιανῶν πεφάνθαι καταλέγοντές τε ταῦτα ἅπερ καθ’ ἡμῶν οἱ ἀγνοοῦντες ἡμᾶς πάντες λέγουσιν, ὥστε οὐ μόνον ἑαυτοῖς ἀδικίας αἴτιοι ὑπάρχετε, ἀλλὰ καὶ τοῖς ἄλλοις ἅπασιν ἁπλῶς ἀνθρώποις’’ Γράφει δὲ καὶ ὡς ὅτι μέχρι καὶ αὐτοῦ χαρίσματα προφητικὰ διέλαμπεν ἐπὶ τῆς ἐκκλησίας, μέμνηταί τε τῆς Ἰωάννου Ἀποκαλύφεως, σαφῶς τοῦ Αgaina second treatise agalnst the Greekshas reaehed us, Which he entitledA Confutation, and besideS them anOther about the Sovereignty of God whieh he compiled not only from our own but also from the books Of the Greeks.
 Besides these he WrOte rile book entitled Psaltes and another disputation Οn the Soul, in whiehhe propounds various questions concerning the problem under discussion and adduees the opinion of the Greek philosophers;
 these he promises to refute and to give his own opinion in another book.
 Ηe also composeda dialogue agailbt the Jews, which he held in the city of Ephesus against Trypho, the most distinguished Jew of the day.
 Ιn this he explains how the grace of God brought him to the wordof the faith, and how he had formerly been Ζealous for philosophie learning and made deep and enthusiastic inquiry into the truth.
 In the samebookhe narrates aboutthe Jews hov they plotted against the teaehing of Christ, and presses the same point against Trypho.
“ Not onlydidyou not repentofthe evil thatyoudid but you choseout picked men at that timeand sent them from Jerusalem to the whole world saying that a seditious sect οf Christians had arisen, and uttering the calumnies which all those who do not know us make againrt us, so that you are not only guilty of unrighteousness against yourselves but also against absolutely all οther men.
” Ηe also writes that eVen up to hisowntime prophetic giftsilluminatedthe church,and quotes the Apocalypse of John, saying clearly that it is the work ἀποστόλου αὐτὴν εἶναι λέγων·
 καὶ ῥητῶν δέ τινων προφητικῶν μνημονεύει, διελέγχων τὸν Τρύφωνα ὡς δὴ περικοψάντων αὐτὰ Ἰουδαίων ἀπὸ τῆς γραφῆς.
 πλεῖστα δὲ καὶ ἕτερα παρὰ πολλοῖς φέρεται ἀδελφοῖς τῶν αὐτοῦ πόνων, οὑτωσὶ δὲ σπουδῆς εἶναι ἄξιοι καὶ τοῖς παλαιοῖς ἐδόκουν οἱ τἀνδρὸς λόγοι, ὡς τὸν Εἰρήναιον ἀπομνημονεύειν αὐτοῦ φωνάς, τοῦτο μὲν ἐν τῷ τετάρτῳ Πρὸς τὰς αὐτὰ αὐτὰ δὴ ταῦτα ἐπιλέγοντα·
“ καὶ καλῶς ὁ Ἰουστῖνος ἐν τῷ πρὸς Μαρκίωνα συντάγματί Φησιν ὅτι αὐτῷ τῷ κυρίῳ οὐκ ἂν ἐπείσθην ἄλλον θεὸν καταγγέλλοντι παρὰ τὸν δημιουργόην,” τοῦτο δὲ ἐν τῷ πέμπτῳ τῆς αὐτῆς ὑποθέσεως διὰ τούτων·
 καὶ καλῶς ὁ Ἰουστῖνος ἔφη ὅτι πρὸ μὲν τῆς τοῦ κυρίου παρουσἰας οὐδέποτε ἐτόλμησεν ὁ σατανᾶς βλασφημῆσαι τὸν θεόν, ἅτε μηδέπω εἰδὼς αὐτοῦ τὴν κατάκρισιν.
” καὶ ταῦτα δὲ ἀναγκαίως εἰρήσθω εἰς προτροπὴν τοῦ μετὰ σπουδῆς τοὺς φιλομαθεῖς καὶ τοὺς τούτου περιέπειν λόγους.
 καὶ τὰ μὲν κατὰ τόνδε τοιαῦτα ἦν.
 ΧΙΧ.
 Ἤδη δὲ εἰς ὄγδοον ἐλαυνούαης ἔτος τῆς δηλουμένης ἡγεμονίας, τῆς Ῥωμαίων ἐκκλησίας τὴν ἐπισκοπὴν Ἀνίκητον ἕνδεκα τοῖς πᾶσιν ἔτεσιν διελθόντα Σωτῆρ’ διαδέχεται, ἀλλὰ καὶ τῆς Ἀλεξ- ανδρέων παροικίας Κελαδίωνος τέτταρσιν ἐπὶ δέκα ἔτεσιν προστάντος, XX.
 τὴν διαδοχὴν Ἀγριππῖνος διαλαμβάνει, καὶ ἐπὶ τῆς Ἀντιοχέων δὲ ἐκκλησίζετο, Θείφιλος ἕκτος ἀπὸ τῶν ἀποστόλων ἐγνωρίζετο, τετάρτου μὲν τῶν ἐκεῖσε μετὰ Ἥρωνα καταστάντος Κορνηλίου, μετὰ δὲ αὐτὸν πέμπτῳ βαθμῷ τὴν ἐπισκοπὴν Ἔρωτος διαδεξαμένου.
 XXI.
 Ἥκμαζον δ’ ἐν τούτοις ἐπὶ τῆς ἐκκλησίας οf the apostle.
 Αnd he also quotes some texts from the prophets bringing the charge against Trypho that the Jews had eut them out of the scripture.
 There are also many works of his extant among many Christians, and thusthe books of this writer seemed even to the aneients worthy οf study, for Irenaeus quotes his works, doing so in the fourth book Against Heresies in these very words:
“ Αnd well does Justin sayin his treatise against Marcion that he would not have believed the Lord himself had he preacheda God other thanthe Creator.
” Again, the fifth book οf the same treatise he quotes him as follows:
“ Αnd welldidJustin say that beforethe coming oftheLord satan darednot blaspheme God, seeing that he ffid not yet know his” These points must serve to encourage students to folow his arguments zealously and such are the facts about him.
 XIX.
 Νοw When the reign of this emperor was approaching the eighth year1 soter succeeded Anicetus in the bishopric of Rome, who had completed eleven years altogether, and when Celadion had presided over the diocese of the Alexandrians for fourteen years, XX.
 Agrippinus took up the succession, and in the church οf the Αntiochians, the famous Theophilus was the sixth from the Αpostles, the fourthhaving been Cornelius, who was appointed after Ηero, and after Cornelius Εros had suceeeded to the bishopric in the fifth place.
 XXI.
 At this time there flourished in the church Ἡγήσιππόσ τε, ὅν ἵσμεν ἐκ τῶν προτέρων, καὶ Διονύσιος Κορινθίων ἐπίσκοπος Πινυτόςτ’ ἑ ἄλλος τῶν ἐπὶ Κρήτης ἐπίσκοπος Φίλιππός τε ἐπὶ τούτοις καὶ Ἀπολινάριος καὶ Μελίτων Μουσανός τε καὶ Μόδεστος καὶ ἐπὶ πᾶσιν Εἰρήναιος, ὧν καὶ εἰς ἡμᾶς τῆς ἀποστολικῆς παραδόσεως ἢ τῆς ὑγιοῦς πίστεως ἔγγραφος κατῆλθεν ὀρθοδοξία.
 XXII.
 Ὁ μὲν οὗν‘ Ηγήσιππος ἐν πέντε τοῖς εἰς ἡμᾶς ἐΛθοῦσιν ὑπομνήμασν τῆς ἰδίας γνώμης τληρεστάτην μνήμην καταλέλοιπεν·
 ἐν οἷς δηλοῖ ὡς πέὀστπος ἐπισκόποις συμμίξειεν ἀποδημίαν στειλάμενος μέχρι Ῥώμης, καὶ ὡς ὅτι τὴν αὐτὴν παρὰ πάντων παρείληφεν διδασκαλίαν.
 ἀκοῦσαί γέ τοι πάρεστιν μετά τινα περὶ τῆς Κλήμεντο πρὸς Κορινθίους ἐπιστολῆς αὐτῷ εἰρημένα ἐπιλέγοντος ταῦτα·
“ καὶ ἐπέμενεν ἡ ἐκκΛησία ἡ Κορινθίων ἐν τῷ ὀρθῷ λόγῳ μέχρι Πρίμου ἐπισκοπεύοντος ἐν Κορίνθῳ·
 οἷς συνέμιξα πλέων εἰς Ῥώμην καὶ συνδιέτριψα τοῖς Κορινθίοις ἡμέρας ἱκανάς, ἐν αἷς συνανεπάημεν τῷ ὀρθῷ λόγῳ·
 γενόμενος δὲ ἐν Ῥώμῃ, διαδοχὴν ἐποιησάμην μέχρις’ Ἀνικήτου·
 οὗ διάκονος ἢν Ἐλεύθερος, καὶ παρὰ Ἀνικήτου διαδέχεται Σωτῆρ’, μεθ’ ὃν Ἐλεύθερος.
 ἐν ἑκάστη δὲ διαδοχῇ καὶ ἐν ἑκάστη πόλει οὕτως ἔχει ὡς ὁ νόμος κηρύσσει καὶ οἱ προφῆται καὶ ὁ κύριος.
 ” Ὁ δ’ αὐτὸς καὶ τῶν κατ’ αὐτὸν αἰρέσεων τὰς ἀρχὰς ὑποτίθεται διὰ τούτων·
“ καὶ μετὰ τὸ μαρτυρῆσαι Ἰάκωβον τὸν δίκαιον, ὡς καὶ ὁ κύριος, ἐπὶ τῷ αὐτῷ λόγῳ, πάλιν ὁ ἐκ θείου αὐτοῦ Συμεὼν ὁ τοῦ Κλωπὰ καθίσταται ἐπίσκοπος, ὅν προέθεντο πάντες, ὄντα ἀνεψιὸν τοῦ κυρίου δεύτερον.
 διὰ τοῦτο ἐκάλουν τὴν ἐκκλησίαν παρθένον, οὔπω γὰρ Ηegesippus, whom we know from former narratives, and Dionysius, bishop ofthe CorinthianS, and Pinytus, another bishopof the Cretans, and Philip, and in addition to them Apolinarius and Melito and Musanus and Modestus and, above all, Irenaeus, and their eorreet opinions οn the sound faith οf the apostolic tradition have come down to us in writing.
 XXII.
 Hegesippus has lefta complete record his οwn opinion in five treatises which have come down to us.
 In them he explriaIns how when travelling as far as Rome he mingled with many bishops and that he found the same doctrine among them all.
 But it is well to listen to What he said after some remarks about the epistle of Clement to the Corinthians:
“ Αnd the chureh οf the Corinthians remained in the truc doctrine until Ρrimus was bishopof Corinth,andI conversed with them οn my voyage to Rome, and spent some days with the corinthians during whieh we were refreshed by the true word.
 When 1 was in Rome Ι reeovered the list οf the succeSsion until Αnicetus, whose deacon was Εleutherus;
 soter Suceeeded Αnicetus, and after him came EleutheruS.
 In each list andin each city things are as the law, the prophets, and the Lord preach.
” The same writeralso deseribes the beginningof the heresiesofhis time as follows:
“ Αfter James the Just had suffered martyrdom for the same reasonas the Lord, symeon, his cousm;
 the son οf Clopas was appointed bishop, whom they all proposed because cause he was another cousin οf the Lord.
 For this cause they called the ehurch virgin, for it had not ἔφθαρτο ἀκοαῖς ματαίαις·
 ἄρχεται δὲ ὁ Θεβουθις διὰ τὸ μὴ γενέσθαι αὐτὸν ἐπίσκοπον ὑποφθείρειν ἀπὸ τῶν ἑπτὰ αἱρέσεων, ὧν καὶ αὐτὸς ἦν, ἐν τῷ λαῷ, ἀφ’ ὧν Σίμων, ὅθεν Σιμωνιανοί, καὶ Κλείβιος, ὅθεν Κλεοβιηνοί, καὶ Δοσίθεος, ὅθεν Λοσιθιανοί, καὶ Γορθαῖος, ὅθεν Γοραθηνοί, καὶ Μασβωθεοι.
 ἀπὸ τούτων Μενανδριανισταὶ καὶ Μαρκιανισταὶ καὶ Καρποκρατιανοὶ καὶ Οὐαλεντινιανοὶ καὶ Βασιλειδιανοὶ καὶ Σατορνιλιανοὶ ἕκαστος ἰδίως καὶ ἑτεροίως ἰδίαν δόξαν παρεισηγάγοσαν, ἀπὸ τούτων ψευδόχριστοι, ψευδοπροφῆται, Ψευδα΄οστολοι, οἵτινες ἐμἐρισαν τὴν ἕνωσιν τῆς ἐκκλησίας Φθοριμαίοις λόγοις κατὰ τοῦ θεοῦ καὶ κατὰ τοῦ Χριστοῦ αὐτοῦ.
 ” Ἔτι δ’ ὁ αὐτὸς καὶ τὰς πάλαι γεγενημένας παρὰ Ἰουδαίοις αἱρίσεις ἱστορεῖ λέγων·
 “ ἦσαν δὲ γνῶμαι διάφοροι ἐν τῆ περιτομὴ ἐν υἱοῖς Ἰσρανλιτῶν κατὰ τῆς φυλῆς Ἰούδα καὶ τοῦ χριστοῦ αὗται·
 Ἐσσαῖοι Γαλιλαῖοι Ἡμεροβαπτισταὶ μασβωθεοι Σαμαρεῖται Σαδδουκαῖοι Φαρισαῖοι.
” Kαὶ ἕτερα δὲ πλεῖστα γράφει, ὧν ἐκ μέρους ἤδη πρότερον ἐμνημονεύσαμεν, οἰκείως τοῖς καιροῖς τὰς ἱστορίας παραθέμενοι, ἔκ τε τοῦ καθ’ Ἑβραίους εὐαγγελίου καὶ τοῦ Συριακοῦ καὶ ἰδίως ἐκ τῆς Ἑβραΐδος διαλέκτου τινὰ τίθησιν, ἐμφαίνων ἐξ Ἑβραίων ἑαυτὸν πεπιστευκύναι, καὶ ἄλλα δὲ ὡς ἐξ Ἰουδαικῆς ἀγράφου παραδόσεως μνημονεύει.
 οὐ Iren.
 4, 20, 3 μόνος δὲ οὗτος, καὶ Εἰρήναιος δὲ καὶ ὁ πᾶς τῶν ἀρχαίων χορὸς πανάρετον Σοφίαν τὰς Σολομῶνος Παροιμίας ἐκάλουν.
 καὶ περὶ τῶν λεγομένων δὲ yet been corruptedby vain messages, but Thebouthis, because hehad not beenmade bishop, begins its corruption by the seven heresies, to whichhe belonged, among the people.
 1 Οf thee were simOn, Whenee the Simonians, and Cleobius, whence the Cleobians, and Dositheus, whence the Dosithians, and Gorthaeus, whence the Goratheni and the Μasbothei.
 From these come the Menandrianists and the Marcianists and the Carpocratians and the Valentinians and the Basilidians and Saturnilians;
 eacg of these puts forward in its own peculiar wayits own opinion, and from them come the false Christs and false prophets and false apostles who detroy the unity of the church by their poisonous doctrine against God and against his Christ.
” The same writeralso described the sects which onee existed among the Jews as follows:
“ Now there were Various opinions among the circumcision, among thechildren of Israel, against the tribe of Judah and the Messiah, as folows:
 Essenes, Galileans, Hemerobaptists, Masbothei, Samaritans, saddueees, and Pharisees.
” Ηe alsowrotemuch more, from which we have already made some quotations, arranging the narratives chronologically, and he makes extracts from the Gospel according to the Ηebrews, and from the and Ρartieularly fromthe Hebrev language, showing that he had been converted from among the Hebrews, and he mentions points as coming from the unwritten tradition of the Jews.
 Αnd not only he but also Irenaeus and the whole company of the ancients called the Proverbs the All- virtuous Wisdom.
 And in disseems ἀποκρύφων διαλαμβάνων, ἐπὶ τῶν αὐτοῦ χρόνων πρός τινων αἱρετικῶν ἀναπεπλάσθαι τινὰ τούτων ἱστορεῖ.
 ἀλλὰ γὰρ ἐφ’ ἕτερον ἤδη μεταβατέον.
 ΧΧΙΙΙ.
 καὶ πρῶτόν γε.
 περὶ Διονυσίου φατέον ὅτι τε τῆς ἐν Κορίνθῳ παροικίας τὸν τῆς ἐπισκοπῆς ἐγκεχείριστο θρόνον, καὶ ὡς τῆς ἐνθέου φιλοπονίας οὐ μόνοις τοῖς ὑπ’ αὐτόν, ἀλλ’ ἤδη καὶ τοῖς ἐπὶ τῆς ἀλλοδαπῆς ἀφθόνως ἐκοινώνει, Χρησιμώτατον ἅπασιν ἑαυτὸν καθιστὰς ἐν αἷς ὑπετυποῦτο καθο- λικαῖς πρὸς τὰς ἐκκλησίας ἐπιστολαῖς·
 ὧν ἐστιν ἡ μὲν πρὸς Λακεδαιμονίους ὀρθοδοξίας κατηχητικὴ εἰρήνης τε καὶ ἑνώσεως ὑποθετική, ἢ δὲ πρὸς Ἀθηναίους διεγερτικὴ πῖστεως καὶ τῆς κατὰ τὸ εὐαγγέλιον πολιτείας, ἧς ὀλιγωρήσαντας ἐλέγχει ὡς ἂν μικροῦ δεῖν ἀποστάντας του λόγου ἐξ οὗπερ τὸν προεστῶτα αὐτῶν Πούπλιον μαρτυρῆσαι κατὰ τοὺς τότε συνέβη διωγμούς.
 Κοδράτου δὲ μετὰ τὸν μαρτυρήσαντα Πούπλιον καταστάντος αὐτῶν ἐπισκόπου μέμνηται, ἐπιμαρτυρῶν ὡς διὰ τῆς αὐτοῦ σπουδῆς ἐπισυναχθέντων καὶ τῆς πίστεως ἀναζωπύρησιν εἰληχότων·
 δηλοῖ δ’ ἐπὶ τούτοις ὡς καὶ Διονύσιος ὁ Ἀρεοπαγίτης ὑπὸ τοῦ ἀποστόλου Παύλου προτραπεὶς ἐπὶ τὴν πίστιν κατὰ τὰ ἐν ταῖς Πράξεσιν δεδηλωμένα, πρῶτος τῆς Ἀθήνησι παροικίας τὴν ἐπισκοπὴν ἐγκεχείριστο.
 ὤη δ’ ἐπιστολή τις αὐτοῦ πρὸς Νικομηδέας φέρεται, ἐν ᾖ τὴν Μαρκίωνος αἵρεσιν πολεμῶν τῷ τῆς ἀληθείας παρίσταται κανόνι.
 καὶ τῇ ἐκκλησίᾳ δὲ τῇ παροικούδῃ Γόρτυναν ἅμα ταῖς λοιπαῖς κατὰ Κρήτην παροικίαις ἐπιστείλας, Φίλιππον ἐπίσκοπον αὐτῶν ἀποδέχεται ἅτε δὴ ἐπὶ πλείσταις μαρτυρουμένης ἀνδραγαθίαις τῆς ὑπ’ αὐτὸν ἐκ- cussing the so- called Apocrypha, he relates that some οf them were fabricated by certain heretics in his own time.
 But we must now pass οnto another writer.
 XXIII.
 Concerning Dionysius it must Rrst be said that he was appointed to the throneof the episcopateofthedioceseof Corinth, and that he communicated his divine industry ungrudgingly not only to those under him but aho to those ata distance,rendering himself most useful to all in the generalepistles which he drew up for the churches.
 1 Αmοng them the lerter to the Lacedaemoniansisan instrunction in orthodoxy onthe subject ofpeaceand unity, and the letter to the Athenians isa call to faith andto life accordingtothe gospel,and for despising this he rehukes them as all but apostates from the truth since the martyrdom οf Publius,2 their leader, in the persecution οf that time.
 Ηe mentions that Quadratuswas appointed their bishop after the martyrdom οf Publius and testffies that through his zeal they had bcen brought together and received a rerival of their faith.
 Moreover, he mentions that Dionysius the Areopagitewas converted by the Αpostle Ρaultothe frialth, accorffing to the narrativeinthe Αcts,and was the first to be appointed to the bishoprie of the dioceseof Αthens.
 There is another extant Ietter of his to the Nicomedians in which he the heresy of Marcion and compares it with the rure ofthe truth.
 Ηe also mote to the ehurch sojourning in Gortyna together with the οther Cretan ffidIoceses, and welcomes their bishop Philip for the reputation λησίας, τήν τε τῶν αἱρετικῶν διαστροφὴν ὑπομιμνήσκει φυλάττεσθαι.
 καὶ τῇ ἐκκλησίᾳ δὲ τῇ παροικούσῃ Ἄμαστριν ἅμα ταῖς κατὰ παροικούσῃ Βακχυλίδου μὲν καὶ Ἐλπίστου ὡς ἂν αὐτὸν ἐπὶ τὸ γραφαὶ προτρεψάντων μέμνηται, γραφῶν τε θείων ἐξηγήσεις παρατέθειται, ἐπί.
 σκοπὸν αὐτῶν ὀνόματι Πάλμαν ὑποσημαίνων πολλὰ δὲ περὶ γάμου καὶ ἁγνείας τοῖς αὐτοῖς παραινεῖ, καὶ τοὺς ἐξ οἵας δ’ οὖν ἀποπτώσεως, εἴτε πλημμελείας εἴτε μὴν αἱρετικῆς πλάνης, ἐπιστρέφοντας δεξιοῦσθαι προστάττει.
 ταύταις’ ἄλλη ἐγκατείλεκται πρὸς Κνωσίους ἐπιστολή, ἐν ἡ Πινυτὸν τῆς παροικίας ἐπίσκοπον παρακαλεῖ μὴ βαρὺ φορτίον ἐπάναγκες τὸ περὶ ἁγνείας τοῖς ἀδελφοῖς ἐπιτιθέναι, τῆς δὲ τῶν πολλῶν καταστοχάζεσθαι ἀσθενείας·
 πρὸς ἢν ὁ Πινυτὸς ἀντιγρόαφων, θαυμάζει μὲν καὶ ἀποδέχεται τὸν Διονύσιον, ἀντιπαρακαλεῖ δὲ στερροτέρας ἤδη ποτὲ μεταδιδόναι τροφῆς, τελειοτέροις γράμμασιν εἰς αὖθις’ τον παρ’ αὐτῷ λαὸν ὑποθρέψαντα, ὡς μὴ διὰ τέλους τοῖς γαλακτώδεσιν ἐνδιατρίβοντες λόγοις τῆ νηπιώδει ἀγωγῆ λάθοιεν καταγηράσαντες·
 δι’ ἧς ἐπιστολῆς καὶ ἢ τοῦ Πινυτοῦ περὶ τὴν πίστιν ὀρθοδοξία τε καὶ φροντὶς τῆς τῶν ὑπηκόων ὠφελείαςτ’ ὁ τε λόγιον καὶ ἡ περὶ τὰ θεῖα σύνεσις ὡς δι’ ἀκριβεστάτης εἰκόνος.
 Ἕτι τοῦ Διονυσίου καὶ πρὸς Ῥωμαίους ἐπιστολὴ φέρεται, ἐπισκόπῳ τῷ τότε Σωτήρι’ προσφωνοῦσα·
 ἐξ ἦς οὐδὲν οἷον τὸ καὶ παραθέσθαι λέξεις δι’ ὧν τὸ μέχρι τοῦ καθ’ ἡμᾶς διωγμοῦ φυλαχθὲν‘ Ρωμαίων ἔθος ἀποδεχόμενος ταῦτα γράφει·
“ ἐξ ἀρχῆς γὰρ ὑμῖν ἔθος ἐστὶν τοῦτο, of the church in his charge for many noble acts,and he enjoins care against heretical error.
 He also wrote to the church sojourning in Amastris, together with the churches in Pontus, and mentions that Bacchylides and Elpistus had urged him to write;
 he adduces interpretations of the divine scriptures,and mentions by name their bishop Palmas.
 Ηe gave them many exhortations about marriageand chastity,and orders them to receive those who are converted from any backsliding, whether of conduct or heretical To this list has been added another epistle to Cnossus, in whichhe exhorts Pinytos, the bishopof the diocese, not to put on the brethrena heavy compulsory burden concerning chastity and to consider the weaknesses of the many.
 To this Pinytos replied that he admircdand welcomed Dionysius, but exhorted him in turnto provide at some time more solid food, and to nourish the people under him with another more advanced letter, so that they might not be fed continuallyon milky words, and be caught unaware by old age Vbile still treated as children.
 In this letter the orthodoxy of Pinytowinthe faith, his care for those under him, his learning and theological understanding are shown as ina most accurate image.
 There is, moreover, extant a letter of Dionysius to the Romans addressed to Soter who was then boshop, and thereis nothing better than to quote the words in which he welcomes the custom of the Romans, which was observed down to the persecution in our own times.
“ This has been your custom from the be- πάντας μὲν ἀδελφοὺς ποικίλως εὐεργετεῖν ἐκ.
 κλησίαις τε πολλαῖς ταῖς κατὰ πᾶσαν πόλιν ἐφόδια πέμπειν, ὧδε μὲν τὴν τῶν δεομένων πενίαν ἄνα.
 ψύχοντας, ἐν μετάλλοις δὲ ἀδελφοῖς ὑπάρχουσιν ἐπιχορηγοῦντας δι’ ὧν πέμπετε ἀρχῆθεν ἐφοδίων πατροπαράδοτον ἔθος Ῥωμαίων Ῥωμαῖοι φυλάτ- τοντες, ὃ οὐ μόνον διατετήρηκεν ὁ μακάριος ὑμῶν ἐπίσκοπος Σωτῆρ’, ἀλλὰ καὶ ηὔξηκεν, ἐπιχορηγῶν μὲν τὴν διαπεμπομένην δαχίλειαν τὴν εἰς τοὺς ἁγίους, λόγοις δὲ μακαρίοις τοὺς ἀνιόντας ἀδελ- φούς, ὡς τέκνα πατὴρ Φιλόστοργος, παρακαλῶν.
” Εν αὐτὴ δὲ ταύτῃ καὶ τῆς Κλήμεντος πρὸς Κορινθίους μέμνηται ἐπιστολῆς, δηλῶν ἀνέκαθεν ἐξ ἀρχαίου ἔθους ἐπὶ τῆς ἐκκλησίας τὴν ἀνάγνωσιν αὐτῆς ποιεῖσθαι·
 λέγει γοῦν·
 “ τὴν σήμερον οὖν κυριακὴν ἁγίαν ἡμέραν διηγάγομεν, ἐν ᾖ ἀν- έγνωμεν ὑμῶν τὴν ἐπιστολήν, ἢν ἕξομεν ἀεί ποτε ἀναγινώσκοντες νουθετεῖσθαι, ὡς καὶ τὴν προτέραν ἡμῖν διὰ Κλήμεντος γραφεῖσαν.
 ” Ἔτι δ’ ὁ αὐτὸς καὶ περὶ τῶν ἰδίων ἐπιστολῶν ὡς ῥᾳδιουργηθεισῶν ταῦτά φησιν·
“ ἐπιστολὰς γὰρ ἀδελφῶν ἀξιωσάντων με γραφαὶ ἕγραψα.
 καὶ ταύτας οἱ τοῦ διαβόλου ἀπόστολοι ζιζανίων γεγέμικαν, ἃ μὲν ἐξαιροῦντες, ἃ δὲ προστιθέντες·
 οἷς τὸ οὐαὶ κεῖται.
 τὸ οὐαὶ κεῖται.
 οὐ θαυμαστὸν ἄρα εἰ καὶ κυριακῶν ῥᾳδιουργῆσαί τινες ἐπιβέβληνται γραφῶν, ὁπότε καὶ ταῖς οὐ τοιαύταις ἐπιβεβουλεύκασιν.
” Καὶ ἄλλη δέ τις παρὰ ταύτας ἐπιστολὴ τοῦ Διονυσίου φέρεται χρυσοφόρα πιστοτάτη ἀδελφῇ ginning, to do good in manifold ways to all Christians, and to send contributions to the many churches in every city, in some places relieving the poverty of the needy, and ministering to the Christiansin the mines,1 by the contribution which you have sent from the beginning, preserving the ancestral custom of the Romans, true Romans as you are.
 Your blessed bishop soter has not only carried on this habit but has even increased it, by administering the bounty distributed to the saints and by exhorting with his blessed words the brethren who cometo Rome, as a loving father would his children.
” In this same letter he also quotes the letter of Clementto the Corinthians, showing that from the beginning it had been the custom to read it in the church.
“ To- day we observed the holydayof the Lord,and readout your letter, whieh we shall continueto read from time to time for our admonition, as we do with that which was formerly sent to us through Clement.
 ” 2 The same writer speaks as follows about the falsification of his owh letters.
“ When Christians asked me to write lettersΙ wrote them, and the apostles of the derivll have filled them with tares, by leavingout some things and putting in others.
 But woe awaits them.
 Therefore it is no wonder that some have gone about to falsify even the scriptures of the Lord When they have plotted against writings so inferior.
” Besides these there is extant another lerter of Dionysius to Chrysophora,a most faithfulChristian, ἐπιστείλαντος, ἧ τὰ κατάλληλα γράφων, τῆς προσηκούσης καὶ αὐτὴ μετεδίδου λογικῆς τροφῆς.
 καὶ τὰ μὲν τοῦ ΔΙονυσίου τοσαῦτα.
 ΧΧΙV.
 Τοῦ δὲ Θεοφίλου, ὃν τῆς Ἀντοχέων ἐκκΛησίας ἐπίσκοπον δεδηλώκαμεν, τρία τὰ πρὸς Αὐτόλυκον στοιχειώδη φέρεται αυγγράμματα, καὶ ἄλλο Πρὸς τὴν αἵρεσιν Ἑρμογένους τὴν ἐπιγραφὴν ἔχον, ἐν ᾧ ἐκ τῆς’ Αποκαλύψεως Ἰωάννου κέχρηται μαρτυρίαις·
 καὶ ἕτερα δέ τινα κατηχητικὰ αὐτοῦ φέρεται βιβλία.
 τῶν γε μὴν αἱρετικῶν οὐ χεῖρον καὶ τότε ζιζανίων δίκην λυμαινομένων τὸν εἰλικρινῆ τῆς ἀποστοΛικῆς διδασκαλίας σπόρον, οἱ πανταχόσε τῶν ἐκκλησιῶν ποιμένες, ὥσπερ τινὰς θῆρας ἀγρίους τῶν Χριστοῦ προβάτων ἀποσοβοῦντες, αὐτοὺς ἀνεῖργον τοτὲ μὲν ταῖς πρὸς τοὺς ἀδελφοὺς νουθεσίαις καὶ ἀποδυόμενοι,, τοτὲ δὲ πρὸς αὐτοὺς γυμνότερον ἀποδυόμενοι, ἀγράφοις τε εἰς πρόσωπον ζητήσεσι καὶ ἀνατροπαῖς, ἤδη δὲ καὶ δι’ ἐγγράφων ὑπομνημάτων τὰς δόξας αὐτῶν ἀκριβεστάτοις ἐλέγχοις διευθύνοντες.
 ὅ γέ τοι Θεόφιλος σὺν τοῖς ἄλλοις κατὰ τούτων στρατευσάμενος δῆλός ἐστιν ἀπό τινος οὐκ ἀγεννῶς αὐτῷ κατὰ Μαρκίωνος πεπονημένου λόγου, ὃς καὶ αὐτὸς μεθ’ ὧν ἄλλων εἰρήκαμεν εἰς ἔτι νῦν διασέσωσται.
 τοῦτον μὲν οὖν ἕβδομος ἀπὸ τῶν ἀποστόλων τῆς Ἀντιοχέων ἐκκλησίας διαδέχεται Μαξιμῖνος.
 XXV.
 Φίλιππός γε μήν, ὃν ἐκ τῶν Διονυσίου φωνῶν τῆς ἐν Γορτύνῃ παροικίας ἐπίσκοπον ἔγνω·
 μὲν, πάνυ γε σπουδαιότατον πεποίηται καὶ αὐτὸς κατὰ Μαρκίωνος λόγον, Εἰρήναιός τε ὡσαύτως καὶ Μόδεστος, ὃς καὶ διαφερόντως παρὰ τοὺς ἄλλους in which he writesto her, suitably imparting to her the proper spiritual food.
 Such are the facts about Dionysius.
 XXIV.
 Of Theophilus, whom we have mentioned as bishop of the church of the Antiochians, three elementarytreatises are extant, addressed to Autolycus, and another with the title, Against theHeresy of Hermogenes, in which he has quoted the Apocalypse of John, and there are also extant some οther books οf his on instruction.
 Heretics were evcn then no less defiling the pure seed of apostolic teaching like tares, and the shepherds ofthe churchesin every place, as though driving off wild beasts from Christ's sheep, excluded them at one timebyrebukes and exhortationsto the brethren, at anotherby their more complete exposure, by unwritten and personal inquiry and conversation, and ultimately correcting their opinions by accurate arguments in written treatises.
 It is elear that Theophilus joined with the others in this campaign against them froma noble trcatise whieh he made against Marcion, which has heen preserved until now with the others that we have mentioned.
 His successor in the church οf the Antiochians was Maximinus, seventh from theapostles.
 XXV.
 Philip, whom we know from the words of Dionysiusas bishop of the diocesein Gortyna, also madea most excellent treatise against Marcion.
 Irenaeus, likewise,and Modestus, 1 who excels beyond τὴν τοῦ ἀνδρὸς εἰς ἔκδηλον τοῖς πᾶσιν κατεφώρασε πλάνην, καὶ ἄλλοι δὲ πλείους, ὧν παρὰ πλείστοις τῶν ἀδελφῶν εἰς ἔτι νῦν οἱ πόνοι διαφυλάττονται.
 XXVI.
 Ἐπὶ τῶνδε καὶ Μελίτων τῆς ἐν Σάρδεσιν παροικίας ἐπίσκοπος Ἀπολινάριός τε τῆς ἐν Ἱεραπόλει διαπρεπῶς ἤκμαζον, οἳ καὶ τῷ δηλω- θέντι κατὰ τοὺς χρόνους‘ Ρωμαίων βασιλεῖ λόγους ὑπὲρ τῆς πίστεως ἰδίως ἑκάτερος ἀπολογίας προσεφώνησαν.
 τούτων εἰς ἡμετέραν γνῶσιν ἀφῖκται τὰ ὑποτεταγμένα·
 Μελίτωνος, τὰ Περὶ τοῦ πάσχα δύο καὶ τὸ Περὶ πολιτείας καὶ προφητῶν καὶ ὁ Περὶ ἐκκλησίας καὶ ὁ Περὶ κυριακῆς λόγος, ἔτι δὲ ὁ Περὶ πίστεως ἀνθρώπου καὶ ὁ Περὶ πλάσεως, καὶ ὁ Περὶ ὑπακοῆς πίστεως καὶ Περὶ αἰσθητηρίων καὶ πρὸς τούτοις ὁ Περὶ ψυχῆς καὶ σώματος ηνενοισ καὶ ὁ Περὶ λουτροῦ καὶ Περὶ ἀληθείας καὶ Περὶ πίστεως καὶ γενέσεως χριστοῦ καὶ λόγος αὐτοῦ προφητείας καὶ Περὶ ψυχῆς καὶ σώματος καὶ ὁ Περὶ φιλοξενίας καὶ ἡ Κλεὶς καὶ τὰ Περὶ τοῦ διαβόλου καὶ τῆς Ἀποκαλύψεως Ἰωάννου καὶ ὁ Περὶ ἐνσωμάτου θεοῦ, ἐπὶ πᾶσι καὶ τὸ Πρὸς Ἀντωνῖνον βιβλίδιον.
 Ἐν μὲν οὖν τῷ Περὶ τοῦ πάσχα τὸν χρόνον καθ’ ὅν συνέταττεν, ἀρχόμενος σημαίνει ἐν τούτοις·
“ ἐπὶ Σερουιλλίου Παύλου ἀνθυπάτου τῆς Ἀσίας, ᾧ Σάγαρις καιρῷ ἐμαρτύρησεν, ἐγένετο ζήτησις the rest in exposing to everyone the man's error,did the same, and thereare many others, too, whose works are still preserved among many Christians.
 XXVI.
 In their time, too, Melito, bishop of the diocese of Sardis, and Apolinarius, bishop of Hierapolis, Vere at the heightof their fame, and each addressed apologetic arguments of their own to the emperor 1 of the Romans of that day, who has been already mentioned.
 The following of their works have come to our knowledge.
 Of Melito two booksΟnthe Passover,a treatise Οn Christian Lifeandthe Prophets,Οn the Church, and Οn the Lord's Day;
 besides these Οn the Faithof Man,and On Creation, and Οnthe Obedience of Faith, and On the Senses2;
 besides these, On theSouland Body,3 and On Baptismand Truth and Faith and Christ's Birth,4 anda treatise ofhis prophecy5and ΟnSouland Body,and On Hospitality,and the Key, and the books Οn the Deuilandthe Apocalypse of John, and OnGod Incarnate;
 above all, the little book To Antoninus.
 6 Αt the beginning of the book On the Passover he indicates the time at which he vas composing it as follows :
“ Ιn the timeOf Servillius Paulus, 7 proconsul, of Αsia, at the timewhenSagaris was martyred, πολλὴ ἐν Λαοδικείᾳ περὶ τοῦ πάσχα, ἐμπεσόντος κατὰ καιρὸν ἐν ἐκείναις ταῖς ἡμέραις, καὶ ἐγράφη παῦτα.
 ” τούτου δὲ τοῦ λόγου μέμνηται Κλήμης ὁ Ἀλεξανδρεὺς ἐν ἰδίῳ Περὶ τοῦ πάσχα λόγῳ, ὃν ὡς ἐξ αἰτίας τῆς τοῦ Μελίτωνος γραφῆς φησιν ἑαυτὸν συντάξαι.
 ἐν δὲ τῷ πρὸς τὸν αὐτοκράτορα βιβλίῳ τοιαῦτά τινα καθ’ ἡμῶν ἐπ’ αὐτοῦ γεγονέναι ἱστορεῖ·
 “ τὸ γὰρ οὐδεπώποτε γενόμενον, νῦν διώκεται τὸ τῶν θεοσεβῶν γένος καινοῖς ἐλαυ- νόμενον δόγμασιν κατὰ τὴν Ἀσίαν.
 οἱ γὰρ ἀναιδεῖς συκοφάνται καὶ τῶν ἀλλοτρίων ἐραστασὶ τὴν ἐκ τῶν διαταγμάτων ἔχοντες ἀφορμήν, φανερῶς λῃστεύουσι, νύκτωρ καὶ μεθ’ ἡμέραν διαρπάζοντες τοὺς μηδὲν ἀδικοῦντας.
” καὶ μεθ’ ἕτερά φησιν·
“ καὶ εἰ μὲν ἀοῦ κελεύσαντος τοῦτο πράττεται, ἕστω καλῶς γινόμενον·
 δίκαιος γὰρ βασιλεὺς οὐκ ἂν ἀδίκως βουλεύσαιτο πώποτε, καὶ ἡμεῖς ἡδέως φέρομεν τοῦ τοιούτου θανάτου τὸ γέρας·
 ταύτην δέ ἀοῖ μόνην προσφέρομεν δέησιν ἵνα αὐτὸς πρότερον ἐπιγνοὺς τοὺς τῆς τοιαύτης φιλονεικίας ἐργάτας, δικαίως κρίνειας εἰ ἄξιοι θανάτου καὶ τιμωρίας ἢ σωτηρίας καὶ ἡσυχίας εἰσίν.
 εἰ δὲ καὶ παρὰ σοῦ μὴ εἴη ἡ βουλὴ αὕτη καὶ τὸ καινὸν τοῦτο διάταγμα, ὃ μηδὲ κατὰ βαρβάρων πρέπει πολεμίων, πολὺ μᾶλλον δεόμεθά ἀοῦ μὴ περιιδεῖν ἡμᾶς ἐν τοιαύτη δημώδει λεηλασίᾳ.
 ” τούτοις αὖθις ἐπιφέρει λέγων·
“ ἡ γὰρ καθ’ ἡμᾶς Φιλοσοφία πρό·
 μὲν ἐν βαρβάροις ἥκμασεν, ἐπανθήσασα δὲ τοῖς σοῖς ἕθνέσιν κατὰ τὴν Αὐγούστου τοῦ σοῦ προγόνου μεγάλην ἀρχήν, ἐγενήθη μάΛιστα τῇ σῇ βασιλείᾳ αἴσιον ἀγαθόν.
 ἔκτοτε γὰρ εἰς μέγα καὶ λαμπρὸν τὸ‘ Ῥωμαίων ηὐξήθη κράτος·
 οὗ σὺ there wasa great discussion aboutthe Passover, which fell accordingto the seasonin those days, and this was written.
” Clement of Alexandria this treatise in his own Οn the Passover, which he says that he compiled in consequence of the writing of Melito.
 Αnd in the book to the emperor he relates thatin his time we were treated as follows:
“ Ιt has never before happened as it is now that the raceof the religious should be persecuted and driven about by new decrees throughout Αria.
 For shameless informers and lovers of other people's property have taken advantageof the decrees, and pillage us openly, harrying night and day those who have done nothing” And after other points he says:
“ Αnd if this is doneas your command, let it be assumed that it.
 it is welldone, for no righteous king would ever have an unrighteous policy, and we gladly bear the honour οf such death.
 But we submit to you this single request, that you will first take cognizance yourself of the authorsof such strife, and judgerighteously whether they are worthy of death and punishment, or of acquittal and immunity.
 But, if it be not from you that there comes this counsel and this new decree( and it wouldbe improper even against barbarian enemies), we beseech you all the more not to neglectust in this brigandagebya mob.
” Ηe then continuesas follows:
“ Our philosophy first grew up among the barbarians, but its full flower came among your nation in the great reign of your ancestor Augustus, and became an omen of good to your empire, for from that time the power of the Romans became great and splendid.
 You are now his διάδοχος εὐκταῖος γέγονάς τε καὶ ἔση μετὰ τοῦ παιδός, φυλάσσων τῆς βασιλείας τὴν σύντροφον καὶ συναρξαμένην Αὐγούστῳ φιλοσοφίαν, ἢν καὶ οἱ πρόγονοί σου πρὸς ταῖς ἄλλαις θρῃσκείαις ετιμησαν, καὶ τοῦτο μεγιστον τεκμήριον του πρὸς ἀγαθοῦ τὸν καθ’ ἡμᾶς λόγον συνακμάσαι τῆ καλῶς ἀρξαμένῃ βασιλείᾳ, ἐκ τοῦ μηδὲν φαῦλον ἀπὸ τῆς Αὐγούστου ἀρχῆς ἀπαντῆσαι, ἀλλὰ τοὐναντίον ἅπαντα λαμπρὰ καὶ ἔνδοξα κατὰ τὰς πάντων εὐχάς.
 μόνοι πάντων, ἀναπεισθέντες ὑπό τινων βασκάνων ἀνθρώπων, τὸν καθ’ ἡμᾶς ἐν διαβολῇ καταστῆσαι λόγον ἠθέλησαν Νέρων καὶ Δομετιανός, ἀφ’ ὧν καὶ τὸ τῆς συκοφαντίας ἀλόγῳ συνηθείᾳ περὶ τοὺς τοιούτους ῥυῆναι συμβέβηκεν ψεῦδος·
 ἀλλὰ τὴν ἐκείνων ἄγνοιαν οἱ σοὶ εὐσεβεῖς πατέρες ἐπηνωρθώσαντο, πολλάκις πολλοῖς ἐπιπλήξαντες ἐγγράφως, ὅσοι περὶ τούτων νεωτερίσαι ἐτόλμησαν·
 ἐν οἷς ὁ μὲν πάππος σου Ἁδριανὸς πολλοῖς μὲν καὶ ἄλλοις, καὶ Φουνδανῷ δὲ τῷ ἀνθυπάτῳ, ἡγουμένῳ δὲ τῆς Ἀσίας, γράφων φαίνεται, ὁ δὲ πατήρ ἀοῦ, καὶ σοῦ τὰ σύμπαντα διοικοῦντος αὐτῷ, ταῖς πόλεσι περὶ τοῦ μηδὲν νεωτερίζειν περὶ ἡμῶν ἔγραφεν, ἐν οἷς καὶ πρὸς νεωτερίζειν καὶ πρὸς Φεσσαλονικεῖς καὶ Ἀθηναίους καὶ πρὸς πάντας Ἕλληνας.
 ἀὲ δὲ καὶ μᾶλλον περὶ τούτων τὴν αὐτὴν ἐκείνοις ἔχοντα γνώμην καὶ πολύ γε φιλανθρωποτέραν καὶ φιλοσοφωτέραν, πεπείσμεθα πάντα πράσσειν ὅσα σου δεόμεθα.
” Ἀλλὰ ταῦτα μὲν ἐν τῷ δηλωθέντι τέθειται λόγῳ·
 ἐν δὲ ταῖς γραφείσαις αὐτῷ Ἐκλογαῖς ὁ happy successor, and shall be so along with your son, 1 if you protect the philosophy which grew up with the empire and began with Αugustus.
 Your ancestors nourished it together with the other cults, and the greatest proof that our doctrine flourishedfor good along with the empire in its noble beginning is the fact that it metno evil in the reignof Αugustus,but on the contrary everything splendid and glorious according to the wishes of all men.
 2 The only emperors who were ever persuaded by malicious men to slander our teaching were Νero and Domitian, and from them arose the lie, and the unreasonable custom of falsely accusing Christians.
 But their ignorance was corrected by your pious fathers, who wrote many rebukes to many, whenever any dared to take new measures against Christians.
 Your grandfather Hadrian shows this in his lettersto many, and especially tothe proconsul Fundanus, the governor οf Αsia,and your father, while you were joined with him3 in the administration οf the world, wrote to the cities that no new measures should be taken concerning us.
 Among these are letters to the Larisians and to the Thessalonians and the Athenians and to allthe Greeks.
 sinee you hold the same opinion about them and, indeed, one which is far kinderand more philosophic, we are persuaded οf your doing all which we beg of you.
” These words are found inthe treatise quoted, but inthe Extracts whichhe wrote the same writer begins αὐτὸς κατὰ τὸ προοίμιον ἀρχόμενος τῶν ὁμολογουμένων τῆς παλαιᾶς διαθήκης γραφῶν ποιεῖται κατάλογον·
 ὃν καὶ ἀναγκαῖον ἐνταῦθα καταλέξαι, γράφει δὲ οὕτως·
“ Μελίτων Ὀνησίμῳ τῷ ἀδελφῷ χαίρειν.
 ἐπειδὴ πολλάκις ἠξίωσας, σπουδῇ τῇ πρὸς τόν λόγον χρώμενος, γενέσθαι σοι ἐκλογὰς ἔκ τε τοῦ νόμου καὶ τῶν προφητῶν περὶ τοῦ σωτῆρος καὶ πάσης τῆς πίστεως ἡμῶν, ἔτι δὲ καὶ μαθεῖν τὴν τῶν παλαιῶν βιβλίων ἐβουλήθης ἀκρίβειαν πόσα τὸν ἀριθμὸν καὶ ὁποῖα τὴν τάξιν εἶεν, ἐσπούδασα τὸ τοιοῦτο πρᾶξαι, ἐπιστάμενός ἀοῦ τὸ σπουδαῖον περὶ τὴν πίστιν καὶ φιλομαθὲς περὶ τὸν λόγον ὅτι τε μάλιστα πάντων πόθῳ τῷ πρὸς τὸν θεὸν ταῦτα προκρίνεις, περὶ τῆς αἰωνίου σωτηρίας ἀγωνιζόμενος.
 ἀνελθὼν οὗν εἰς τὴν ἀνατολὴν καὶ ἕως τοῦ τόπου γενόμενος ἔνθα ἐκηρύχθη καὶ ἐπράχθη, καὶ ἀκριβῶς μαθὼν τὰ τῆς παλαιᾶς διαθήκης βιβλία, ὑποτάξας ἔπεμψά σοι·
 ὧν ἐστι τὰ ὀνόματα·
 Μωυσέως πέντε, Γένεσις Ἔξοδος Ἀριθμοὶ Λευιτικὸν Δευτερονόμιον, Ἰησοῦς Ναυῆ, Κριταί, Ῥούθ, Βασιλειῶν τέσσαρα, Παραλειπομένων δύο, Ψαλμῶν Δαυίδ, Σολομῶνος Παροιμίαι ἡ καὶ Σοφία, Ἐκκλησιαστής, Ἆισμα Ἀισμάτων, Ἰὼβ, Προφητῶν Ἡσαΐου Ἱερεμίου τῶν δώδεκα ἐν μονοβίβλῳ Δανιὴλ, Ἰεζεκιήλ, Ἔσδρας·
 ἐξ ὧν καὶ τὰς ἐκλογὰς ἐποιησάμην, εἰς ἓξ βιβλία διελών.
” καὶ τὰ μὲν τοῦ Μελίτωνος τοσαῦτα.
 ΧΧVII.
 Τοῦ δ’ Ἀπολιναρίου πολλῶν παρὰ πολλοῖς σῳζομένων τὰ εἰς ἡμᾶς ἐλθόντα ἐστὶν τάδε·
 λόγος ὁ πρὸς τὸν προειρημένον βασιλέα καὶ Πρός Ἕλληνας συγγράμματα πέντε καὶ Περὶ ἀληθείας in his preface by makinga list of the recognized scriptures ofthe ΟΙd Testament, whcih itis necessary to enumerate here, and he writes as follows:
“ Melito toOnesimus his brother, greeting.
 Since you often desired, in your zeal forthe true word, to have extracts from theLawand the Prophets concerning the Saviour, and concerningall our faith, and, moreover,since you wished to know the accurate facts about the ancient writings, how many they arein number, and what is their order,Ι have taken pains to do thus, forΙ know yourzeal for the faithand interest in the word, and thatinyour struggle for eternal salvation you esteem these things more highly than all else in your love towards God.
 Accordingly whenI came totheeastand reached the place where these things were preached and done, and learnt accurately the books of the Οld Testament,Ι set down the facts and sent them to you.
 These are their names:
 five books of Μoses, Genesis, Exodus, Νumbers, Leviticus, Deuteronomy, Joshua the son of Νun, Judges, Ruth, four books of Kingdoms, two books of Chronicles, the Ρsalmsof David, the Proverbs of Solomon and his Wisdom, Ecclesiastes, the Song of Songs, Job,the prophets Isaiah, Jeremiah,the Twelve ina single book, Daniel, Ezekiel, Ezra.
 From theseΙ have made extracts and compiled them in six” Such are the facts about Melito.
 XXVII.
 Of the manywritingsof Apolinarius which have been widely preserved the following have reached us:
 Α treatise to the above mentioned emperor, 1 five books Against the Greeks, and books one and twoΟn the Truth, one and to Against the α΄ β΄ καὶ Πρὸς Ἰουδαίους ἁ β΄ καὶ ἃ μετὰ ταῦτα συνέγραφε κατὰ τῆς τῶν Φρύγων αἱρέσεως, μετ’ οὐ πολὺν καινοτομηθείσης χρόνον, τότε γε μὴν ὥσπερ ἐκφύειν ἀρχομένης, ἔτι τοῦ Μοντανοῦ ἅμα ταῖς αὐτοῦ ψευδοπροφήτισιν ἀρχὰς τῆς παρεκτροπῆς ποιουμένου.
 ΧΧVIII.
 καὶ Μουσανοῦ δέ, ὃν ἐν τοῖς φθάσασιν κατελέξαμεν, φέρεταί τις ἐπιστρεπτικώτατος λόγος, πρός τινας αὐτῷ γραφεὶς ἀδελφοὺς ἀποκλίναντας ἐπὶ τὴν τῶν λεγομένων Ἐγκρατιτῶν αἵρεσιν, ἄρτι τότε φύειν ἀρχομένην ξένην τε καὶ φθοριμαίαν ψευδοδοξίαν εἰσάγουσαν τῷ βίῳ·
 XXIX.
 ἧς παρεκτροπῆς ἀρχηγὸν καταστῆναι Τατιανὸν λόγος ἔχει, οὗ μικρῷ πρόσθεν τὰς περὶ τοῦ θαυμασίου Ἰουστίνου παρατεθείμεθα λέξεις, μαθητὴν αὐτὸν ἱστοροῦντες τοῦ μάρτυρος.
 δηλοῖ δὲ τοῦτο Εἰρήναιος ἐν τῷ πρώτῳ τῶν Πρὸς τὰς αἱρέσεις, ὁμοῦ τά τε περὶ αὐτοῦ καὶ τῆς κατ’ αὐτὸν αἱρέσεως οὕτω γράφων·
“ ἀπὸ Σατορνίνου καὶ Μαρκίωνος οἱ καλούμενοι Ἐγκρατεῖς ἀγαμίαν ἐκήρυξαν, ἀθετοῦντες τὴν ἀρχαίαν πλάσιν τοῦ θεοῦ καὶ ἠρέμα κατηγοροῦντες τοῦ ἄρρεν καὶ θῆλυ εἰς γένεσιν ἀνθρώπων πεποιηκότος, καὶ τῶν λεγομένων παρ’ αὐτοῖς ἐμψύχων ἀποχὴν εἰσηγήσαντο, ἀχαριστοῦντες τῷ πάντα πεποιηκότι θεῷ, ἀντιλέγουσί τε τῆ τοῦ πρωτοπλάστου σωτηρίᾳ.
 καὶ τοῦτο νῦν ἐξευρέθη παρ’ αὐτοῖς Τατιανοῦ τινος πρώτως ταύτην εἰσενέγκαντος τὴν βλασφημίαν·
 ὃς Ἰουστίνου ἀκροατὴς γεγονώς, ἐφ’ ὅσον μὲν συνῆν ἐκείνῳ, οὐδὲν ἐξ.
 ἔφηνεν τοιοῦτον, μετὰ δὲ τὴν ἐκείνου μαρτυρίαν Jerus, and after this the treatises which he wrote against the heresy of the Phrygians, which had begun its innovations not long beforeand was then,as it were, beginning to sprout, while Montanus with his false prophetesses1 was making the beginnings of the error.
 XXVIII.
 Αnd of Musanus, whom we have mentioned ina previous passage, there is extant a certain very eloquent discourse which he wrote to some Christians who had fallen away to the heresy of the so- called Encratites,2 which was at that time just beginning to sprout and to introduce into life its strange and corrupting false doctrine.
 XXIX.
 The story goes that Tatian wasthe author of this error, whose wordswe quoted a little above concerningthe marvellous Justin, and related thathewasa disciple of the martyr.
 Irenaeus states this in his firstbook, Againstthe Heresies, and in the same place writes thus concerning him and his heresy.
“ The so- ealled Encratites proceeding from Saturninus and Marcion preached against marriage, annulling the original creation of God, and tacitly condemning him who made male and female.
 They also introduced abstention from what they called‘ animate᾿ thignsin ingratitude to the Godwhohas made all things, and they deny the salvation of the first created man.
 This innovation was recently made by them when a certain Tatian first introduced this blasphemy.
 Ηe had beena hearer of Justinbut so long as hewas with him, he produced nothing of this king, but after the martyrdomofJustin heleftthe church, being ἀποστὰς τῆς ἐκκλησίας, οἰήματι διδασκάλου ἐπαρθεὶς καὶ τυφωθεὶς ὡς διαφέρων τῶν λοιπῶν, ἴδιον χαρακτῆρα διδασκαλείου συνεστήσατο, αἰῶνάς τινας ἀοράτους ὁμοίως τοῖς ἀπὸ Οὐαλεντίνου μυθολογήσας γάμον τε φθορὰν καὶ πορνείαν μυθολογήσας Μαρκίωνι καὶ Σατορνίνῳ ἀναγορεύσας, τῆ δὲ τοῦ Ἀδὰμ σωτηρίᾳ παρ’ ἑαυτοῦ τὴν ἀντιλογίαν ποιησάμενος.
 ” ταῦτα μὲν ὁ Εἰρήναιος τότε·
 σμικρῷ δὲ ὕστερον Σευῆρός τις τοὔνομα κρατύνας τὴν προδεδηλωμένην αἵρεσιν, αἴτιος τοῖς ἐξ αὐτῆς ὡρμημένοις τῆς ἀπ’ αὐτοῦ παρηγμένης Σευηριανῶν προσηγορίας γέγονεν.
 χρῶνται μὲν οὗν οὗτοι νόμῳ καὶ προφήταις καὶ εὐαγγελίοις, ἰδίως ἑρμηνεύοντες τῶν ἱερῶν τὰ νοήματα γραφῶν·
 βλασφημοῦντες δὲ Παῦλον τὸν ἀπόστολον, ἀθετοῦσιν αὐτοῦ τὰς ἐπιστολάς, μηδὲ τὰς Πραξεῖς τῶν ἀποστόλων καταδεχόμενοι.
 ὁ μέντοι γε πρό.
 αὐτῶν ἀρχηγὸς ὁ Τατιανὸς συνάφειάν τινα καὶ συναγωγὴν οὐκ οἶδ’ ὅπως τῶν εὐαγγελίων συνθείς, Τὸ διὰ τεσσάρων τοῦτο προσωνόμασεν, ὃ καὶ παρά τισιν εἰς ἔτι νῦν φέρεται·
 τοῦ δ’ ἀποστόλου φασὶ τολμῆσαί τινας αὐτὸν μεταφράσαι φωνάς, ὡς ἐπιδιορθούμενον αὐτῶν τὴν τῆς φράσεως σύνταξιν.
 καταλέλοιπεν δὲ οὗτος πολύ τι πλῆθος συγγραμμάτων, ὧν μάλιστα παρὰ πολλοῖς μνημονεύεται διαβόητος αὐτοῦ λόγος ὁ Πρὸς Ἕλληνας, ἐν ᾧ καὶ τῶν ἀνέκαθεν χρόνων μνημονεύσας, τῶν παρ’ Ἕλλησιν εὐδοκίμων ἁπάντων προγενέστερον Μωυσέα τε καὶ τοὺς Ἑβραίων προφήτας ἀπέ- φηνεν·
 ὃς δὴ καὶ δοκεῖ τῶν συγγραμμάτων ἁπάντων αὐτοῦ κάλλιστός τε καὶ ὠφελιμώτατος ὑπάρχειν.
 καὶ τὰ μὲν κατὰ τούσδε τοιαῦτα ἢν.
 exalted by the idea of becominga teacher and puffed up as superior to others.
 He established hisowntype of doctrine, telling storiesof invisible Aeons, like the followers of Valentinus, and rejecting marriage as corruption and fornication similarly to Marcion and Saturninus.
 Αnd as his own contribution he denied the salvation of Αdam. ’
’ Irenaeus wrote thus at that time.
 But a little latera certain man named Severus strengthened the above mentioned heresy, and isthereason why thosewhohave sprung from it obtained the name of Severiani from him.
 These indeed use the Law and the Prophetsand the Gospels, though they interpret the facts of the sacred scriptures in their own way, but they blaspheme the Apostle ΡauΙ, and reject his epistles and do no receive the Acts of the Apostles.
 Their former leader Tatian composed in some way a combination and collection of the gospels, and gave this the name of The Diatessaron, 1 and this is still extant in some places.
 And they say that he venturedtoparaphrase some words of the apostle, as though correcting their style.
 Ηe has lefta great numberof writings,οf which the most famous, quoted by many, is his discourse Against the Greeks.
 Ιn it he deals with primitive history, and shows that Moses and the prophets of the Hebrews preceded all those who are celebrated among the Greeks.
 This seems to be the bestand most helpful of all his writings.
 Such are the facts of this period.
 XXX.
 Ἐπὶ δὲ τῆς αὐτῆς βασιλείας, πληθυουσῶν τῶν αἱρέσεων ἐπὶ τῆς Μέσης τῶν ποταμῶν, Βαρδησάνης, ἱκανώτατός τις ἀνὴρ ἔν τε τῆ Σύρων φωνῇ διαλεκτικώτατος, πρὸς τοὺς κατὰ Μαρκίωνα καὶ τινας ἑτέρους διαφόρων προϊσταμένους δογμάτων διαλόγους συστησάμενος τῆ οἰκείᾳ παρέδωκεν γλώττη τε καὶ γραφῆ μετὰ καὶ πλείστων ἑτέρων αὐτοῦ συγγραμμάτων·
 οὓς οἱ γνώριμοι( πλεῖστοι δὲ ἦσαν αὐτῷ δυνατῶς τῷ λόγῳ παρισταμένῳ) ἐπὶ τὴν Ἑλλήνων ἀπὸ τῆς Σύρων μεταβεβλήκασι φωνῆς·
 ἐν οἷς ἐστιν καὶ ὁ πρὸς Ἀντωνῖνον ἱκανώτατος αὐτοῦ Περὶ εἱμαρμένης διάλογος δάα τε ἄλλα φασὶν αὐτὸν προφάσει τοῦ τότε διωγμοῦ συγγράψαι.
 ἦν δ’ οὗτος πρότερον τῆς κατὰ Οὐαλεντῖνον σχολῆς, καταγνοὺς δὲ ταύτης πλεῖστά τε τῆς κατὰ τοῦτον μυθοποιίας ἀπελέγξας, ἐδόκει μέν πως αὐτὸς ἑαυτῷ ἐπὶ τὴν ὀρθοτέραν γνώμην μετατεθεῖσθαι, οὐ μὴν καὶ παντελῶς γε ἀπερρύψατο τὸν τῆς παλαιᾶς αἱρέσεως ῥύπον.
 Ἐν τούτῳ γε μὴν καὶ ὁ τῆς Ῥωμαίων ἐκκλησίας ἐπίσκοπος Σωτῆρ’ τελευτᾷ.
 XXX.
 In the samereign heresies increased in Mesopotamia, and Bardesanes, a most able man and skilled in Syriac, composed ffidlalogues against the Marcionites and other leadersof various opinions, and he issued themin his own language and script, together with many othcr οf his writings.
 Those who knew them;
 and they were many, for he wasa powerful arguer, have translated them from Syriac into Greek.
 Αmong them is his very powerful dialogue with Antoninus Concerning Fate, and they say that he wrotemanyοther works in conscquence of the persecution of that time.
 Ηe had been firsta member of the Valentinians, but condemned this school and refuted many oftheir fables, and himself thought that he had changed to orthodox opinion, but in fact he did not completely clean off the ffith of his ancient heresy.
 Αt this time Soter, bishop of Rome, died.
 Εݲ Τάδε καὶ ἢ πέμπτη περιέχει βίβλος τῆς Εκκλησιαστικῆς ἱστορίας Αݲ Ὃσοι καὶ ὅπως κατὰ Οὐῆρον ἐπὶ τῆς Γαλλίας τὸν ὑπὲρ τῆς εὐσεβείας διεξῆλθον ἀγῶνα.
 Bݲ ‘ Ως οἱ θεοφιλεῖς μάρτυρες τοὺς ἐν τῷ διωγμῷ διαπεπτωκότας ἐθεράπευον δεξιούμενοι.
 Γݲ‘ Οποία τῷ μάρτυρι Ἀττάλῳ δι’ ὀνείρου- γέγονεν ἐπιφάνεια.
 Δݲ ὅπως οἱ μάρτυρες τὸν Εἰρήναιον δι’ ἐπιστολῆς παρετίθεντο.
 Εݲ Ὡς Μάρκῳ Αὐρηλίῳ Καίσαρι ταῖς τῶν ἡμετέρων εὐχαῖς οὐρανόθεν ὁ θεὸς ἐπακούσας ὗσεν.
 ςݲ τῶν ἐπὶ Ῥώμης ἐπισκοπευσάντων κατάλογος.
 Ζݲ ὃς καὶ μέχρι τῶν τότε καιρῶν διὰ τῶν πιστῶν δυνάμεις ἐνηργοῦντο παράδοξοι.
 Ηݲ Ὃπως ὁ Εἰρήναιος τῶν θείων μνημονεύει γραφῶν.
 Θݲ Οἱ κατὰ Κόμοδον ἐπισκοπεύσαντες.
 Ιݲ Περὶ Πανταίνου τοῦ φιλοσόφου.
 ΙΑݲ Περὶ Κλήμεντος τοῦ Ἀλεξανδρέως.
 ΙΒݲ Περὶ τῶν ἐν Ἰεροσολύμοις ἐπισκόπων.
 ΙΓݲ Περὶ Ῥόδωνος καὶ ἦς ἐμνημόνευσεν κατὰ Μαρκίωνα διαφωνίας.
 CONTENTS OF BOOKSV The contents of the fifth book of the History of the Curch are as follows:
 I.
 The number and behaviour of those those who in the time of verus underwent in Gaul the struggle for religion.
 II.
 Ηow the martyrs, beloved οf God, gave the hand οf fellowshipand healing to those whohad fallen in the persecution.
 IΙI.
 ne vision which appeared ina dream to the martyr Αttalus.
 IV.
 Ηow the martyrs commended Irenaeus by a letter.
 v.
 Ηοw God sent rain from heaven to Marcus Aurelius Caesar in response to the prayers of the christians.
 VI.
 The list of those who were bishops in Rome.
 VII.
 Ηow even until those times strange miracles were wrought by the faithful.
 VIII.
 Ηow Irenaeus quotes the divine Scriptures.
 IX.
 Those who were bishops under Commodus.
 X.
 On Ρantaenus the philosopher.
 XI.
 On Clement οf Αlexandria.
 XII.
 On the bishops in Jerusalem.
 XIII.
 On Rhodo andthe dissensions whichhementions among the Marcionites.
 ΙݲΔݲ Περὶ τῶν κατὰ Φρύγας ψευδοφητῶν.
 IݲEݲ Περὶ τοῦ κατὰ Bλάστον ἐπὶ ῾Ρώμης γενομένου σχίσματος.
 Ιݲςݲ ὅσα περὶ Μοντανοῦ καὶ τῶν μετ’ αὐτοῦ ψευδοπροφητῶν μνημονεύεται.
 ΙݲΖݲ Περὶ Μιλτιάδου καὶ ὧν συνέταξε λόγων.
 ΙݲΗݲ Ὅσα καὶ Ἀπολλώνιος τοὺς κατὰ Φρύγας ἀπήλεγξεν καὶ τίνων ἐμνημόνευσεν.
 ΙݲΘݲ Σεραπίωνος περὶ τῆς τῶν Φρύγων αἱρέσεως.
 Κݲ Ὅσα Εἰρήναιος τοῖς ἐπὶ Ῥώμης σχισματικοῖς ἐγγράφως διείλεκται.
 ΚݲΑݲ ὍΠως ἐπὶ ῾Ρώμης Ἀπολλώνιος ἐμαρτύρησεν.
 KݲBݲ Τίνες κατὰ τούτους ἐπίσκοποι ἐγνωρίζοντο.
 ΚݲΓݲ Περὶ τοῦ τότε κινηθέντος ἀμφὶ τοῦ πάσχα ζητήματος.
 ΚݲΔݲ Περὶ τῆς κατὰ τὴν Ἀαίαν διαφωνίας.
 ΚݲΕݲ Ὅπως τοῖς πᾶσι μία ψῆφος περὶ τοῦ πάσχα συνεφωνήθη.
 Κݲςݲ Ὅσα τῆς Εἰρηναίου φιλοκαλίας καὶ εἰς ἡμᾶς κατῆλθεν.
 ΚݲΖݲ Ὅσα καὶ τῶν λοιπῶν τῶν τηνικάδε σὺνηκμακότων.
 KݲΗݲ Περὶ τῶν τὴν Ἀρτέμωνος αἵρεσιν ἐξ ἀρχῆς προβεβλημένων οἰοί τε τὸν τρόπον γεγόνασιν καὶ ὅπως τὰς ἁγίας γραφὰς διαφθεῖραι τετολμήκασιν.
 XIV.
 On the Montanist1 false prophets.
 XV.
 About the schism at Rome under BlastuS.
 XVL The tradition concerning Montanus and those who were false prophets together with him.
 XVII.
 Οn Miltiades andthe treatises which he composed.
 XVIII.
 Ηow Apollonius also refuted the Montanists and the quotations whichhe made.
 XIX.
 Οf Serapion On Montanism.
 XX.
 The discussions of Irenaeus in writing with the schimatics at Rome.
 XXI.
 How Apllonius was martyred in Rome.
 XXII.
 What bishops were famous in these times.
 XXIII.
 Οn the paschal controversy which was then active.
 XXIV.
 On the division in Asia.
 XXV.
 How unanimous decision was reaehed concerning Easter.
 XXVI.
 How much of the eloquent work of Irenaeus has come down to us.
 XXVII.
 How much also of the otherswhoflourished with him at that time.
 XXVIII.
 Οn those who at the beginningput forward theheresyof Artemon, what manner ofmen they were, and how they have dared to corrupt the holy Scriptures.
 E Ὁ μὲν οὗν τῆς Ῥωμαίων ἐκκλησίας ἐπίσκοπος Σωτῆρ’ ἐπὶ ὄγδοον ἔτος ἡγησάμενος τελευτᾷ τὸν βίον·
 τοῦτον δωδέκατος ἀπὸ τῶν ἀποστόλων Ελεύθερος διαδέχεται, ἔτοςδ’ ἢν ἑπτακαιδέκατον αὐτοκράτορος Ἀντωνίνου Οὐήρου·
 ἐν ᾧ κατά τινα μέρη τῆς γῆς σφοδρότερον ἀναρριπιαθέντος τοῦ καθ’ ἡμῶν διωγμοῦ, ἐξ ἐπιθέσεως τῶν κατὰ πόλεις δήμων μυριάδας μαρτύρων διαπρέψαι στοχασμῷ λαβεῖν ἔνεστιν ἀπὸ τῶν καθ’ ἓν ἔθνος συμβεβηκότων, ἃ καὶ γραφῇ τοῖς μετέπειτα παραδοθῆναι, ἀλήστου μνήμης ὦς ἀληθῶς ἐπάξια ὄντα, συμβέβηκεν.
 τῆς μὲν οὖν περὶ τούτων ἐντελεστάτης ὑφηγήσεως τὸ πᾶν σύγγραμμα τῇ τῶν μαρτύρων ἡμῖν κατατέτακται συναγωγῇ, οὐχ ἱστορικὴν αὐτὸ μόνον, ἀλλὰ καὶ διδασκαλικὴν περιέχον διήγησιν·
 ὁπόσα γε τοι τῆς παρούσης ἔχοιτο πραγματείας, ταῦτ’ ἐπὶ τοῦ παρόντος ἀναλεξάμενος πραγματείας, ἄλλοι μὲν οὗν ἱστορικὰς ποιούμενοι διηγήσεις πάντως ἂν παρέδωκαν τῆ γραφῆ πολέμων νίκας καὶ τρόπαια κατ’ ἐχθρῶν στρατηγῶν τε ἀριστείας καὶ ὁπλιτῶν ἀνδραγαθίας, αἵματι καὶ μυρίοις φόνοις παίδων καὶ πατρίδος καὶ τῆς ἄλλης ἕνεκεν περιουσίας μιανθέντων·
 ὁ δέ γε τοῦ κατὰ θεὸν BOOKV SORER, the bishop of the church of Rome, ended his life in the eighth year οf his rule.
 To him succeeded Elutherus, the twelfthfrom the apostles, and itwas the seventeenth year of the Emperor Antonius Verus.
 1 Ιn this time the persecution οf us in some parts of the world was rekindled more violently by popular violencein the cities, and, to judge from the eventsinοne nation, myriads were distinguished by martyrdom.
 The story has chanced to be handed down in writingfor posterity,and it is truly worthy of unceasing remembrance.
 sincc the whole reeord of its complete treatment has been embodied in our collection οf martyrs, 2 and containsnot merely the narrahve itself but also an exposition οf doctrine,I will at present select and quote merely such points as belong to the present undertaking.
 Other writers οf historical works have confined themselves to the written tradition of victoriesin wars,of trimnphs οver enemies,of the exploits of generals and the valourof soldiers, men stained with blood and with countless murders for the sake of children and country and other possessions;
 but it iswars most peaceful, πολιτεύματος διηγηματικὸς ἡμῖν λόγος τοὺς ὑπὲρ αὐτῆς τῆς κατὰ ψυχὴν εἰρήνης εἰρηνικωτάτους πολέμους καὶ τοὺς ἐν τούτοις ὑπὲρ ἀληθείας μᾶλλον ἢ πατρίδος καὶ μᾶλλον ὑπὲρ εὐσεβείας ἢ τῶν φιλτάτων ἀνδρισαμένους αἰωνίαις ἀναγράφεται στήλαις, τῶν εὐσεβείας ἀθλητῶν τὰς ἐνστάσεις καὶ τὰς πολυτλήτους ἀνδρείας τρόπαιά τε τὰ κατὰ δαιμόνων καὶ νίκας τὰς κατὰ τῶν ἀοράτων ἀντιπάλων τοὺς ἐπὶ πᾶσι τούτοις στεφάνους εἰς αἰώνιον μνήμην ἀνακηρύττων.
 I.
 Γαλλία μὲν οὗν ἡ χώρα ἢν, καθ’ ἢν τὸ τῶν δηλουμένων συνεκροτεῖτο στάδιον, ἦς μητροπόλεις ἐπίσημοι καὶ παρὰ τὰς ἄλλας τῶν αὐτόθι διαφέρουσαι βεβόηνται Λούγδουνος καὶ Βίεννα, δι’ ὧν ἀμφοτέρων τὴν ἅπασαν χώραν πολλῷ τῷ ῥεύματι περιρρέων ὁ Ῥοδανὸς ποταμὸς διέξεισιν.
 τὴν οὖν περὶ τῶν μαρτύρων γραφὴν αἱ τῇδε διαφανέσταται εκκλησίαι ταῖς κατὰ τὴν Ἀσίαν καὶ Φρυγίαν διαπέμπονται, τὰ παρ’ αὐταῖς πραχθέντα τοῦτον ἀνιστοποῦσαι τὸν τρόπον, παραθήσομαι δὲ τὰς αὐτῶν φωνάς·
 “ οἱ ἐν Βιέννῃ καὶ Λουγδούνῳ τῆς Γαλλίας παροικοῦντες δοῦλοι χριστοῦ τοῖς κατὰ τὴν Ἀσίαν καὶ Φρυγίαν τὴν αὐτὴν τῆς ἀπολυτρώσεως ἡμῖν πίστιν καὶ ἐλπίδα ἔχουαιν ἀδελφοῖς·
 εἰρήνη καὶ χάρις καὶ δόξα ἀπὸ θεοῦ πατρὸς καὶ Χριστοῦ Ἰησοῦ τοῦ κυρίου ἡμῶν.
” Εἶτα τούτοις ἑξῆς ἕτερα προοιμιασάμενοι, τὴν τοῦ λόγου καταρχὴν ποιοῦνται ἐν τούτοις·
 “ τὸ μὲν οὗν μέγεθος τῆς ἐνθάδε θλίψεως καὶ τὴν τοσαύτην τῶν ἐθνῶν εἰς τοὺς ἁγίους ὀργὴν καὶ δάα ὑπέμειναν οἱ μακάριοι μάρτυρες, ἐπ’ ἀκριβὲς οὔθ’ ἡμεῖς εἰπεῖν ἱκανοὶ οὔτε μὴν γραφῆ περιληφθῆναι waged for the very peace of the sOul, and men who therein have been valiant for truth rather than for country, and for piety rather than for rileir dear ones, that our reeord of those who order their lives according to God will inscribe on everlasting monuments:
 it is the struggles of the athletes of piety and their valour which braved so much, trophies won from demons, and victories against unseen adversaries, and the crowns at the endof all, that it will proclaim for everlasting remembrance.
 1.
 Gaul was the country in which was prepared the stage for these events.
 Its capital cities, famous and more renowned than the others in the distriet, were Lyolb and Vienne, through both of which passes the river Rhone, flowing in an ample stream through the whole district.
 The distingtliSlled churches of this country sent the document about the martyrs to the churches in Asia and Phrygia, in thisway recording what happedned among them, andI will quote their words:
“ The servants sojourning in Vienne and Lyons in Gaul to the brethren in Αsia and Phrygia, who have the same faith and hope of redemption as you.
 Ρeace, grace, and glory from God the Father and Jesus Christ, our Lord.
” Then after other prefatory remarks they begin their narrative thus:
“ The greatnessofthe persecution here, and the terrible rage of the heathen against the saints, and the suffering of the blessed martyrs, are more than we can narrate accurately, nor can they be put down in writing.
 For with all δυνατόν.
 παντὶ γὰρ σθένει ἐωέσκηψεν ὁ ἀντικείμενος, προοιμιαζόμενος ἤδη τὴν ἀδεῶς μέλλουσαν ἔαεαθαι παρουσίαν αὐτοῦ, καὶ διὰ πάντων διῆλθεν, ἐθίζων τοὺς ἑαυτοῦ καὶ προγυμνάξων κατὰ τῶν δούλων τοῦ θεοῦ, ὥατε μὴ μόνον οἰκιῶν καὶ βαλανείων καὶ ἀγορᾶς εἴργεαθαι, ἀλλὰ καὶ τὸ καθόλου φαίνεαθαι ἡμῶν τινα αὐτοῖς ἀπειρῆσθαι ἐν ὁποίῳ δήποτε τόπῳ.
 ἀντεστρατήγει δὲ ἡ χάρις τοῦ θεοῦ, καὶ τοὺς μὲν ἀσθενεῖς ἐρρύετο, ἀντιπαρέτασσε δὲ στύλους ἑδραίους δυναμένους διὰ τῆς ὑπομονῆς πᾶσαν τὴν ὁρμὴν τοῦ πονηροῦ εἰς ἑαυτοὺς ἑλκύσαι·
 οἳ καὶ ὁμόσε ἐχώρουν, πᾶν εἶδος ὀνειδισμοῦ καὶ κολάσεως ἀνεχόμενοι·
 οἳ καὶ τὰ πολλὰ ὀλίγα ἡγούμενοι ἔαπευδον πρὸς χριστόν, ὄντως ἐπιδεικνύμενοι ὅτι οὐκ ἄξια τὰ παθήματα τοῦ νῦν καιροῦ πρὸς τὴν μέλλουσαν δόξαν ἀπο- καλυφθῆναι εἰς ἡμᾶς.
“ Kαὶ πρῶτον μὲν τὰ ἀπὸ τοῦ ὄχλου πανδημεὶ σωρηδὸν ἐπιφερόμενα γενναίως ὑπέμενον, ἐπιβοήσεις καὶ πληγὰς καὶ συρμοὺς καὶ διαρπαγὰς καὶ λίθων βολὰς καὶ συγκΛείσεις καὶ πάνθ’ ὅσα ἠγριωμένῳ πλήθει ὡς πρὸς ἐχθροὺς καὶ πολεμίους φιλεῖ γίνεαθαι, καὶ δὴ ἀναχθέντες εἰς τὴν ἀγορὰν ὑπό τε τοῦ χιλιάρχου καὶ τῶν προεατηκότων τῆς πόλεως ἐξουσιῶν ἐπὶ παντὸς τοῦ πλήθους ἀνακριθέντες καὶ ὁμολογήσαντες, συνεκλείσθησαν εἰς τὴν εἱρκτὴν ἕως τῆς τοῦ ἡγεμόνος παρουσίας·
 μειέπειτα δὲ ἐπὶ τὸν ἡγεμόνα ἀχθέντων αὐτῶν κἀκείνου τῆ πρὸς ἡμᾶς ὠμότητι χρωμένου, Οὐέττιος Ἐπάγαθος, εἷς ἐκ τῶν ἀδελφῶν, πλήρωμα ἀγάπης τῆς πρὸς τὸν θεὸν καὶ πρὸς τὸν πλησίον κεχωρηκώς, οὗ καὶ ἐπὶ τοσοῦτον ἠκρίβωτο ἡ πολιτεία, ὡς his might the adversary attaeked us, foreshadowing his coming which is shortly to be, and tried everything, practising his adherents and training them ngainst the servants of God, so that we were not merely excluded from houses and baths and markets, but we were even forbidden to be seen at all in any place whatever.
 But against them the grace of God did eaptain us;
 it reseued the weak, and marshalled against them steadfast pillars of men able by patience to draw to themselves all the attack of the enemy.
 They cmne together and endured every kind of abuseand punishment, they eounted many things as few in their zeal for Christ, and ffidld indeed prove that the sufferings of this present time are not worthy to bc compared with the glory which shall be revealed to us.
“ First they endured nobly all that was heaped upon them by the mob, howls and stripes and dragging about, and rapine and imprisonment and stoning, and all things which are wont to happen at the hands of an infuriated populace against its supposed enemies and foes;
 then they were dragged into the market- place by the tribune and by the chief authoritiesof the city, were indicted and eonfessed, and at last they were shut up until the coming οf the governor.
 Then they were brought beforethe governor,and When he used all his eruelty against them, then intervened Vettius Εpagathus, one οf the brethren, mled filled with love towards and towards his neighbour, the strietness οf whose life καίπερ ὄντα νέον ουνεξισοῦσθαι τῇ τοῦ πρεσβυτέρου Ζαχαρίου μαρτυρίᾳ·
 πεπόρευτο γοῦν ἐν πάσαις ταῖς ἐντολαῖς καὶ δικαιώμασι τοῦ κυρίου ἄμεμπτος καὶ πάσῃ τῇ πρὸς τὸν πλησίον λειτουργίᾳ ἄοκνος, ζῆλον θεοῦ πολὺν ἔχων καὶ ξέων τῷ πνεύματι·
 τοιοῦτος δή τις ὤν, τὴν οὕτως καθ’ ἡμῶν ἀλόγως γινομένην κρίσιν οὐκ ἐβάστασεν, ἀλλ’ ὑπερηγανάκτησεν καὶ ἠξίου καὶ αὐτὸς ἀκουσθῆναι ἀπολογούμενος ὑπὲρ τῶν ἀδελφῶν ὅτι μηδὲν ἄθεον μηδὲ ἀσεβές ἐστιν ἐν ἡμῖν.
 τῶν δὲ περὶ τὸ βῆμα καταβοησάντων αὐτοῦ, καὶ γὰρ ἦν ἐπίσημος, καὶ τοῦ ἡγεμόνος μὴ ἀνασχομένου τῆς οὕτως ὑπ’ αὐτοῦ δικαίας προταθείσης ἀξιώσεως, ἀλλὰ μόνον τοῦτο πυθομένου εἰ καὶ αὐτὸς εἴη Χριστιανός, τοῦ δὲ λαμπροτάτη φωνῇ ὁμοΛογήσαντος, ἀνελήφθη καὶ αὐτὸς εἰς τὸν κλῆρον τῶν μαρτύρων, παράκλητος χριστιανῶν χρηματίσας, ἔχων δὲ τὸν παράκλητον ἐν ἑαυτῷ, τὸ πνεῦμα τοῦ Ζαχαρίου, ὃ διὰ τοῦ πληρώματος τῆς ἀγάπης ἐνεδείξατο, εὐδοκήσας ὑπὲρ τῆς τῶν ἀδελφῶν ἀπολογίας καὶ τὴν ἑαυτοῦ θεῖναι Ψυχήν·
 ἦν γὰρ καὶ ἔστιν γνήσιος χριστοῦ μαθητής, ἀκολουθῶν τῷ ἀρνίῳ ὅπου ἄν ὑπάγῃ.
“ Ἐντεῦθεν δὴ διεκρίνοντο οἱ λοιποί, καὶ φανεροὶ καὶ ἕτοιμοι ἐγίνοντο πρωτομάρτυρες, οἳ καὶ μετὰ πάσης προθυμίας ἀνεπλήρουν τὴν ὁμολογίαν τῆς μαρτυρίας, ἐφαίνοντο δὲ καὶ οἱ ἀνέτοιμοι καὶ ἀγύμναστοι καὶ ἔτι ἀσθενεῖς, ἀγῶνος μεγάλου had gone so far that in spite οf his youth his reputation was equal to that οf the elder Zacharias.
 1 Ηe walked in all the commanmnents and orffinances of the Lord blameless and was unwearied in all ministrations to his neighbours, having much zeal toward God and being fervent in spirit.
 Ηis character forbade him to endure the unreasonable judgement given agninst us, and,overcome with indignation, he askedtobe heard himself in defence of the brethren to the effect that there was nothing atheistic or impious among us.
 Ηe was howled down by those around the judgement- seat, for he wasa man οf position,2 and the governor would not tolerate the just requests which he had put forward but merely asked if he were a Chrirtian hinBeK.
 Ηe then confessedin clear tones and was himself taken into the ranks of the martyrs.
 Ηe was called the‘ Comforterof Christians,’ but had the Comforterin himself, spirit of Zacharias which he had shown by the fullness of his love when he chose to Ιay down even his οwn life for the defence of the brethren, for he was and he is 3a true ffidlsciple οf christ,and he follows the Lamb wheresoeverhe goes.
“ The rest werethen ffidIrided andthefirst martyrswere obviously ready, and they fulffiled the confession of martyrdomwith all reaffiness, but some οthers appeared nottobe ready, and failcd in training and in strength, unable to endure the strain τόνον ἐνεγκεῖν μὴ δυνάμενοι·
 ὧν καὶ ἐξέτρωσαν ὡς δέκα τὸν ἀριθμόν·
 οἳ καὶ μεγάλην λύπην καὶ πένθος ἀμέτρητον ἐνεποίησαν ἡμῖν καὶ τὴν προθυμίαν τῶν λοιπῶν τῶν μὴ αυνειλημμένων ἐνέκοψαν·
 οἳ καίπερ πάντα τὰ δεινὰ πάσχοντες, δμὼς συμπαρῆσαν τοῖς μάρτυσιν καὶ οὐκ ἀπελείποντο αὐτῶν, τότε δὲ οἱ πάντες μεγάλως ἐπτοήθημεν διὰ τὸ ἄδηλον τῆς ὁμολογίας, οὐ τὰς ἐπιφερομένας κολάσεις φοβούμενοι, ἀλλὰ τὸ τέλος ἀφορῶντες καὶ τὸ ἀποπεσεῖν τινα δεδιότες.
 συνελαμβάνοντο μέντοι καθ’ ἑκάστην ἡμέραν οἱ ἄξιοι τὸν ἐκείνων ἀναπληροῦντες ἀριθμόν, ἓστε συλλεγῆναι ἐκ τῶν δύο ἐκκλησιῶν πάντας τοὺς σπουδαίους καὶ δι’ ὧν μάλιστα συνεστήκει τὰ ἐνθάδε·
 συνελαμβάνοντο δὲ καὶ ἐθνικοί τινες οἰκέται τῶν ἡμετέρων, ἐπεὶ δημοσίᾳ ἐκέλευσεν ὁ ἡγεμὼν ἀναζητεῖσθαι πάντας ἡμᾶς·
 οἳ καὶ κατ’ ἐνέδραν τοῦ σατανᾶ, φοβηθέντες τὰς βασάνους ἃς τοὺς ἁγίους ἔβλεπον φοβηθέντες τῶν στρατιωτῶν ἐπὶ τοῦτο παρορμώντων αὐτούς, κατεψεύσαντο ἡμῶν Θυέστεια δεῖπνα καὶ Οἰδιποδείους καὶ δάα μήτε λαλεῖν μήτε νοεῖν θέμις ἡμῖν, ἀλλὰ μηδὲ πιστεύειν εἴ τι τοιοῦτο πώποτε παρὰ ἀνθρώποις ἐγένετο.
 τούτων δὲ φημισθέντων, πάντες ἀπεθηριώθησαν εἰς ἡμᾶς, ὥστε καὶ εἴ τινες τὸ πρότερον δι’ οἰκειότητα ἐμετρίαζον, τότε μεγάλως ἐχαλέπαινον καὶ διεπρίοντο ἐφ’ ἡμῖν·
 ἐπληροῦτο δὲ τὸ ὑπὸ τοῦ κυρίου ἡμῶν εἰρημένον ὃτι ἐλεύσεται καιρὸς ἐν ᾧ πᾶς ὁ ἀποκτείνας ὑμᾶς δόξει λατρείαν προσφέρειν τῷ θεῶ.
 ἐνταῦθα λοιπὸν ὑπεράνω πάσης ἐξηγήσεως ὑπέμενον κολάσεις οἱ ἅγιοι μάρτυρες, φιλοτίμου μένου τοῦ σατανᾶ καὶofa great cOnffiet, and abOut ten in nmber failed, as those born out of due time.
 They caused us great griefandimmeasurable mourning,and hindered the zeal of the others wo had not been arrerted.
 Yet they, although sufferingallthe terrors, nervertheless remained with the martyrs and did not desert them.
 But at that point we wereall greatly terrifiedby uncertainty astotheir confession, not fearillg the threatened punishment but looking towards the end and afraid lest some one should fall away.
 Yet day by day those who were worthy went on being ariested, completing their number, so as to collect from the two churches all the zealous and those through whom the life of the locality was kept together.
 There were also arrested certain heathen slavesof our members, since the governor had publicly commanded that we should all be prosecuted,and these by the snare of Satan, fearing the tortures which they saw the saints suffering, when the soldiers urged them, falsely accusedusof Theyestean feasts and Oedipodean intercourse, 1 and things which it is not right for us either to speak οf or to think of or even to believe that such things could ever happen among men.
 When this rumour spread all men turned like beab againt us, so that even if any had formerly been lenient for friendship's sake they then became furious and raged against us, and there was fulfilled that which was spoken by our Lord that ‘ the rime will come when whosoever killeth you will think that he doeth God’ Then at last the holy martyrs endured sufferings beyong all description, for Satan was striving to wring some δι’ ἐκείνων ῥηθῆναί τι τῶν βλααφήμων·
 ὑπερβεβλημένως δὲ ἐνέσκηψεν ἡ ὀργὴ πᾶσα καὶ ὄχλου καὶ ἡγεμόνος καὶ στρατιωτῶν εἰς Σάγκτον τὸν διάκονον ἀπὸ Βιέννης καὶ εἰς Μάτουρον, νεοφώτιστον μέν, ἀλλὰ γενναῖον ἀγωνιστήν, καὶ εἰς Ἄτταλον Περγαμηνὸν τῷ γένει, στῦλον καὶ ἑδραίωμα τῶν ἐνταῦθα ἀεὶ γεγονότα, καὶ εἰς Βλανδῖναν, δι’ ἧς ἐπέδειξεν ὁ χριστὸς ὅτι τὰ παρὰ ἀνθρώποις εὐτελῆ καὶ ἀειδῆ καὶ εὐκαταφρόνητα φαινόμενα μεγάλης καταξιοῦται παρὰ θεῷ δόξης διὰ τὴν πρὸς αὐτὸν ἀγάπην τὴν ἐν δυνάμει δείκνυ·
 μένην καὶ μὴ ἐν εἴδει καυχωμένην.
 ἡμῶν γὰρ πάντων δεδιότων καὶ τῆς σαρκίνης δεσποίνης αὐτῆς, ἥτις ἦν καὶ αὐτὴ τῶν μαρτύρων μία ἀγωνίστρια, ἀγωνιώσης μὴ οὐδὲ τὴν ὁμολογίαν δυνήσεται παρρησιάσασθαι διὰ τὸ ἀσθενὲς τοῦ σώματος, ἢ Βλανδῖνα τοσαύτης ἐπληρώθη δυνάμεως, ὣστε ἐκλυθῆναι καὶ παρεθῆναι τοὺς κατὰ διαδοχὰς παντὶ τρόπῳ βασανίζοντας αὐτὴν ἀπὸ ἑωθινῆς ἕως ἑσπέρας, καὶ αὐτοὺς ὁμολογοῦντας ὅτι νενίκηνται μηδὲν ἔχοντες μηκέτι ὃ ποιήσωσιν αὐτῇ, καὶ θαυμάζειν ἐπὶ τῷ παραμένειν ἔμπνουν αὐτήν, παντὸς τοῦ σώματος περιερρωγότος καὶ ἠνεῳγμένου, καὶ μαρτυρεῖν ὅτι ἓν εἶδος στρεβλώσεως ἱκανὸν ἢν πρὸς τὸ ἐξαγαγεῖν τὴν Ψυχήν, οὐχ ὅτι γε τοιαῦτα καὶ τοσαῦτα.
 ἀλλ’ ἡ μακαρία ὡς γενναῖος ἀθλητὴς ἀνενέαζεν ἐν τῇ ὁμολογίᾳ, καὶ ἦν αὐτῆς ἀνάληψις καὶ ἀνάπαυσις καὶ ἀναλγησία τῶν συμβαινόντων τὸ λέγειν ὅτι‘ Χριστιανή εἰμι καὶ παρ’ ἡμῖν οὐδὲν φαῦλον γίνεται. ’
 “ Ὁ δὲ Σάγκτος καὶ αὐτὸς ὑπερβεβλημένως καὶ ὑπὲρ πάντα ἄνθρωπον πάσας τὰς ἐξ ἀνθρώπων blasphemyeVen from them, and all the fury of the mob and of the gOVernor and Of the soldiers was raised beyond meaSure against sanetus, the deacon from Vienne,and against Maturus, who wasa noviee buta noble contender,and against Attalus,a pergameneby race, who had always beena pillar and support ofthe Christians there,and against Blandina, through whom Christ showed that things which are mean and obscure and contemptible among men are vouehsafed great glory with God beeause or the love towardS him shown in powere and not boasted of in appearance.
 For while wewere all afraid, and her human mistress, who was herselfone of the contendersamongthe martyrs,was in distress lest she shouldnot be able,throughthe weaknessofher body, to be bold enough evenro make confession, Blandina was ffiled with such power that she was released and rescued from those who took turns in torturing her in every way from morning until evening, and they themselves eonfessed that they were beaten, for they had nothing left to do to her, and they marvelled that she still remained alive, seeing that her whole body was broken and opened, and they testified that any oneof these tortures was suffieient to destroy life, even when they had not been magnffied and multiplied.
 But the blessed woman, likea noble athlete, kept gaining in vigour in her confession, and found comfort and rest and freedom from pain from what was done toherby saying,‘ I ama Christian woman and nothing wicked happens among us. ’
“ Sanctus also himself endured nobly, beyond measureor human power, all theill- treament of αἰκίας γενναίως ὑπομένων, τῶν ἀνόμων ἐλπιζόντων διὰ τὴν ἐπιμονὴν καὶ τὸ μέγεθος τῶν βασάνων ἀκούσεσθαι τι παρ’ αὐτοῦ τῶν μὴ δεόντων, τοσαύτῃ ὑποστάσει ἀντιπαρετάξατο αὐτοῖς, ὥστε μήτε τὸ ἴδιον κατειπεῖν ὄνομα μήτε ἔθνους μήτε πόλεως ὅθεν ἦν, μήτε εἰ δοῦλος ἢ ἐλεύθερος εἴη·
 ἀλλὰ πρὸς πάντα τὰ ἐπερωτώμενα ἀπεκρίνατο τῆ Ῥωμαϊκῇ φωνῇἴ’‘ Χριστιανός εἰμι’·
 τοῦτο καὶ ἀντὶ ὀνόματος καὶ ἀντὶ πόλεως καὶ ἀντὶ γένους καὶ ἀντὶ παντὸς ἐπαλλήλως ὡμολόγει, ἄλλην δὲ φωνὴν οὐκ ἢκουσαν αὐτοῦ τὰ ἔθνη·
 ὅθεν δὴ καὶ φιλονεικία μεγάλη τοῦ τε ἡγεμόνος καὶ τῶν βασανιστῶν ἐγένετο πρὸς αὐτόν, ὣστε ὁπότε μηκέτι μηδὲν εἶχον ὃ ποιήσωσιν αὐτῷ, τὸ τελευταῖον χαλκᾶς λεπίδας διαπύρους προσεκόλλων τοῖς τρυφερωτάτοις μέλεαι τοῦ σώματος καὶ ταῦτα μὲν ἐκαίετο, αὐτὸς δὲ παρέμενεν ἀνετίκαμπτος καὶ ἀνένδοτος, στερρὸς πρὸς τὴν ὁμολογίαν, ὑπὸ τῆς οὐρανίου πηγῆς τοῦ ὕδατος τῆς ζωῆς τοῦ ἐξιόντος ἐκ τῆς νηδύος τοῦ Χριστοῦ δροσιζόμενος καὶ ἐνδυναμούμενος·
 τὸ δὲ σωμάτιον μάρτυς ἢν τῶν συμβεβηκότων, ὅλον τραῦμα καὶ μώλωφ καὶ συνεσταμένον καὶ ἀποβεβληκὸς τὴν ἀνθρώπειον ἔξωθεν μορφήν, ἐν ᾧ πάσχων Χριστὸς μεγάλας ἐπετέλει δόξας, καταργῶν τὸν ἀντικείμενον καὶ εἰς τὴν τῶν λοιπῶν ὑποτὐπωσιν ὑποδεικνύων ὅτι μηδὲν φοβερὸν ὅπου πατρὸς ἀγάπη, μηδὲ ἀλγεινὸν ὅπου χριστοῦ δόξα.
 τῶν γὰρ ἀνόμων μεθ’ ἡμέρας πάλιν στρεβλούντων τὸν μάρτυρα καὶ νομιζόντων ὅτι οἰδούντων καὶ φλεγμαινόντων τῶν σωμάτων, εἰ τὰ αὐτὰ προσενέγκοιεν κολαστήρια, περιέσοιντο αὐτοῦ, ὁπότε οὐδὲ τὴν ἀπὸ τῶν χειρῶν ἁφὴν ἠνείχετο, ἢ ὅτι men, for though the wieked hoped through persistence and the rigour of his tortures to wring from him something wrong, he resisted them with such constancy that he did not even tell his own name, or the race or the citywhencebe was, nor whether he was slave or free, but to all questionsansweredin Latin,‘Iama Christian.’
 This he said forand city and race andfor everything else, and the heathen heard no other sound from him.
 For this reason the governor and the torturers were very ambitiousto subdue him, so that when theybad nothing left at all to do to him at last they fastened plates of heated brass to the tenderest parts of his body.
 His limbs were burnig, but he continued himself unbending and unyielding, firm in his confession, refreshed and strengthened by the heavenly springof the waterof life which proceeds forth from the bodyof Christ.
 His body wasa witness to his treatment it was all one woundand bruise, wrenehed and torn outof human shape, but Christ suffering in him manifested great glory, overthrowing the adversary and showing for the example of the others how there is nothing fearful where there is the love of the Father nor painful where there is the glory of Christ.
 For when the wicked after some days again tortured the martyr they thought that they might overcome him how that his body was swollen and inflamed if they appliedthe same tortures, seeing that he couldnot even endure to be ἐναποθανὼν ταῖς βασάνοις φόβον ἐμποιήσειεν τοῖς λοιποῖς, οὐ μόνον οὐδὲν περὶ αὐτὸν τοιοῦτο συνέβη, ἀλλὰ καὶ παρὰ πᾶσαν δόξαν ἀνθρώπων ἀνέκθψεν καὶ ἀνωρθώθη τὸ σωμάτιον ἐν ταῖς μετέπειτα βασάνοις, καὶ τὴν ἰδέαν ἀπέλαβεν τὴν προτέραν καὶ τὴν χρῆσιν τῶν μελῶν, ὣστε μὴ κόλασιν, ἀλλ’ ἴασιν διὰ τῆς χάριτος τοῦ χριστοῦ τὴν δευτέραν στρέβλωσιν αὐτῷ γενέσθαι.
“ Καὶ Βιβλίδα δέ, μίαν τῶν ἠρνημένων, ἤδη δοκῶν ὁ διάβολος καταπεπωκέναι, θελήσας δὲ καὶ διὰ βλασφημίας κατακρῖναι, ἦγεν ἐπὶ κόλασιν, ἀναγκάζων εἰπεῖν τὰ ἄθεα περὶ ἡμῶν, ὡς εὔθραυοτον ἤδη καὶ ἄνανδρον·
 ἢ δὲ ἐν τῆ στρεβλώσει ἀβλενηψεν καὶ ὡς ἂν εἰπεῖν ἐκ βαθέος ὕπνου ἀνεγρηγόρησεν, ὑπομνησθεῖσα διὰ τῆς προσκαίρου τιμωρίας τὴν αἰώνιον ἐν γεέννῃ κόλασιν, καὶ ἐξ ἐναντίας ἀντεῖπεν τοῖς βλασφήμοις, φήσασα πῶς ἂν παιδία φάγοιεν οἱ τοιοῦτοι, οἷς μηδὲ ἀλόγων ζῴων αἷμα φαγεῖν ἐξόν;’
 καὶ ἀπὸ τοῦδε Χριστιανὴν ἑαυτὴν ὡμολόγει καὶ τῷ κλήρῳ τῶν μαρτύρων προσετέθη.
 “ Καταργηθέντων δὲ τῶν τυραννικῶν κόλα.
 στηρίων ὑπὸ τοῦ Χπιστοῦ διὰ τῆς τῶν μακαρίων ὑπομονῆς, ἑτέρας μηχανὰς ὁ διάβολος ἐπενόει, τὰς κατὰ τὴν εἱρκτὴν ἐν τῷ σκότει καὶ τῷ χαλεπωτάτῳ χωρίῳ συγκλείσεις καὶ τὰς ἐν τῷ ξύλῳ διατάσεις τῶν ποδῶν, ἐπὶ πέμπτον διατεινομένων τρύπημα, καὶ τὰς λοιπὰς αἰκίας, δάας εἰώθασιν ὀργιζόμενοι ὑπουργοὶ καὶ ταῦτα διαβόλου πλήρεις διατιθέναι τοὺς ἐγκλειομένους·
 ὥστε ἀποπνιγῆναι τοὺς πλείστους ἐν τῇ εἱρκτῇ, ὅσους γε ὁ κύριος οὕτως ἐξελθεῖν ἠθέλησεν, ἐπιδεικνύων τὴν αὐτοῦ δόξαν.
 οἱ μὲν γὰρ βασανισθέντες πικρῶς ὣστε touchedbythe hand, or that by dying under torture he would put fear into the rest.
 Yet not only did nothing of this kind happen, but, beyond all human expectation, he raised himself up and his body was straightened inthe subsequent tortures, and he regained his former appearance and the useof his limbs, so that through the grace of Christ the second torturing became not torment but cure.
“ Biblis, too, one of those who had denied, did the devil bring to torture(thinking that hehadalready swallowed herup and wishingtocondemn her through blasphemyas well), to force her to say immpious things about us, as though she were already broken and weak.
 But she recovered under torture, and, as it were, woke up outofdeep sleep, being reminded through this transitory punishment of the eternal tormentsin hell,and contradicted the blasphemers, saying,‘ How would such men eat children, when they are not allowed to eat the blood even of irrational animals?’ And after this she confessed herselfa Christian andwas added tothe ranks of the martyrs.
“ But whenthe tyrant's torments had been brought to naught by Christ through the endurance of the blessed saints, the devil thought of other devices, imprisonment in the jail in darkness and in the most horrible place, and stretching their feet in the stocks, separated tothe fifth hole,and the other outrages which angry warders filled with the devil are accustomed to inflict on the prisoners.
 Thus most of them were strangledinthe prison, being all those whom the Lord had chosen thus to depart manifesting his glory.
 Some were tortured so cruelly δοκεῖν μηδὲ τῆς πάσης θεραπείας τυχόντας ἔτι ζῆσαι δύνασθαι, παρέμενον ἐν τῇ εἱρκτῇ, ἔρημοι μὲν τῆς παρὰ ἀνθρώπων ἐπιμελείας, ἀναρρωννύμενοι δὲ ὑπὸ κυρίου καὶ ἐνδυναμούμενοι καὶ σώματι καὶ ψυχῇ καὶ τοὺς λοιποὺς παρορμῶντες καὶ Παραμυθούμενοι·
 μενοι·
 οἱ δὲ νεαροὶ καὶ ἄρτι συενιλημμένοι, ὧν μὴ προκατῂκιστο τὰ σώματα, τὸ βάρος οὐκ ἔφερον τῆς συγκλείσεως, ἀλλ’ ἔνδον ἐναπέθνησκον.
 Ὁ δὲ μακάριος Ποθεινός, ὁ τὴν διακονίαν τῆς ἐπιακοπῆς ἐν Λουγδούνῳ πεπιστευμένος, ὑπὲρ τὰ ἐνενήκοντα ἔτη τῆς ἡλικίας γεγονὼς καὶ πάνυ ἀσθενὴς τῷ σώματι, μόλις μὲν ἐμπνέων διὰ τὴν προκειμένην σωματικὴν ἀσθλένειαν, ὑπὸ δὲ πρὸ.
 θυμίας πνεύματος ἀναρρωννύμενος διὰ τὴν ἐγκει- μένην τῆς μαρτυρίας ἐπιθυμίαν, καὶ αὐτὸς ἐπὶ τὸ βῆμα ἐσύρετο, τοῦ μὲν σώματος καὶ ὑπὸ τοῦ γήρως καὶ ὑπὸ τῆς νόσου λελυμένου, τηρουμένης δὲ τῆς Ψυχῆς ἐν αὐτῷ, ἵνα δι’ αὐτῆς χριστὸς θραμβεύσῃ·
 ὃς ὑπὸ τῶν στρατιωτῶν ἐπὶ τὸ βῆμα κομισθείς, παραπεμπόντων αὐτὸν τῶν πολιτικῶν ἐξουσιῶν καὶ παντὸς τοῦ πλήθους, ἐπιβοήσεις παντοίας ποιουμένων ὡς αὐτοῦ ὄντος τοῦ Χριστοῦ, ἀπεδίδου τὴν καλὴν μαρτυρίαν.
 ἀνεταζόμενος δὲ ὑπὸ τοῦ ἡγεμόνος τίς εἴη χριστιανῶν ὁ θεός, ἔφη ἐὰν ᾖς ἄξιος, γνώση’·
 ἐντεῦθεν δὲ ἀφειδῶς ἐσύρετο καὶ ποικίλας ἔπασχε πληγάς, τῶν μὲν σύνεγγυς χερσὶν καὶ ποσὶν ἐνυβριζόντων παντοίως, μηδὲ τὴν ἡλικίαν αἰδουμένων αὐτοῦ, τῶν δὲ μακράν,ὃ μετὰ χεῖρας ἕκαστος εἶχεν, εἰς αὐτὸν ἀκοντιζόντων, πάντων δὲ ἡγουμένων μεγάλως πλημμελεῖν καὶ ἀσεβεῖν, εἴ τις ἀπολειφθείη τῆς εἰς αὐτὸν ἀσελγείας·
 καὶ γὰρ τοὺς θεοὺς αὐτῶν that it seemed impossible for them to live even if they had had every care, yet surrived in the prison, bereft of human attention but strengthened by the Lord and given power in body and soul, and looking after and comforting the rest.
 But the younger ones, who had lately been arrested, whose boffidles had not become accustomedto it, did not endure the burden οf cofinement but died in prison.
 “ The blessed Pothinus, who had been entrusted with the ministry ofthe bishoprie at Lyons,was over nunety years old and very weak physically.
 Ηe was scarcely breathing through the physical weakness which had aheady come upon ffihlm, but was strengthened by zeal of spirit through urgent desire of martyrdom.
 Ηe was dragged before the judgementseat, and althoughhis body was weakened by old ageand disease,his soulwas kept in him in order that through it Christ might triumph.
 Ηe was brought by soldiers to the judgement- seat;
 the local authorities accompanied him, and all the populace, uttering all kinds of howls at him as though he was Christ himself, but he gave noble testimony.
 When asked by the governor, Who was the God of the Christians,he said,‘ Ifyou are worthy, you will’ And then he was dragged about without mercy, and suffered many blows;
 for those who were near ilhtreated him with feet and hands andin every way, without respect even forhis old age, and those who were ataffistance each threw at him whatever he had at hand,and all thought that it would bea great transgressionand impiety to omitany abuse against him.
 For they thought that in ᾤοντο οὕτως ἐκδικήσειν.
 καὶ μόγις ἐμπνέων ἐρρίφη ἐν τῆ εἱρκτῇ καὶ μετὰ δύο ἡμέρας ἀπέψθξεν.
“ Ἐνταῦθα δὴ μεγάλη τις οἰκονομία θεοῦ ἐγίνετο καὶ ἔλεος ἀμέτρητον ἀνεφαίνετο Ἰησοῦ, σπανίως μὲν ἐν τῇ ἀδελφότητι γεγονός, μὴ ἀπολειπόμενον δὲ τῆς τέχνης χριστοῦ.
 οἱ γὰρ κατὰ τὴν πρώτην σὐλληψιν ἔξαρνοι γενόμενοι συνεκλείοντο καὶ αὐτοὶ καὶ μετεῖχον τῶν δεινῶν·
 οὐδὲ γὰρ ἐν τῷ καιρῷ τούτῳ ὄφελός τι αὐτοῖς ἡ ἐξάρνησις ἐγίνετο, ἀλλ’ οἱ μὲν ὁμολογοῦντες ὃ καὶ ἦσαν, συνεκλείοντο ὡς χριστιανοί, μηδεμιᾶς ἄλλης αἰτίας αὐτοῖς ἐπιφερομένης, οὗτοι δὲ λοιπὸν ὡς ἀνδροφόνοι καὶ μιαροὶ κατείχοντο, διπλότερον παρὰ τοὺς λοιποὺς κολαζόμενοι.
 ἐκείνους μὲν γὰρ ἐπεκούφιζεν ἡ χαρὰ τῆς μαρτυρίας καὶ ἡ ἐλπὶς τῶν ἐπηγγελμένων καὶ ἡ πρὸς τὸν χριστὸν ἀγάπη καὶ τὸ πνεῦμα τὸ πατρικόν, τούτους δὲ τὸ συνειδὸς μεγάλως ἐτιμωρεῖτο, ὥστε καὶ παρὰ τοῖς λοιποῖς ἃπασιν κατὰ τὰς παρόδους διαδήλους τὰς ὄφεις αὐτῶν εἶναι.
 οἳ μὲν γὰρ ἱλαροὶ προῂεσαν, δόξης καὶ χάριτος πολλῆς ταῖς ὄφεσιν αὐτῶν συγκεκρα- μένῃς, ὣστε καὶ τὰ δεσμὰ κόσμον εὐπρεπῆ πέρι.
 κεῖσθαι αὐτοῖς, ὡς νύμφῃ κεκοσμημένη ἐν κροσσωτοῖς χρυσοῖς πεποικιλμένοις, τὴν εὐωδίαν ὀδωδότες ἅμα τὴν Χριστοῦ, ὣστε ἐνίους δόξαι καὶ μύρῳ κοσμικῷ κεχρῖσθαι αὐτούς·
 οἳ δὲ κατηφεῖς καἰ ταπεινοὶ καὶ δυσειδεῖς καὶ πάσης ἀσχημοσύνης ἀνάπλεοι, προσέτι δὲ καὶ ὑπὸ τῶν ἐθνῶν ὀνειδιζόμενοι ὡς ἀγεννεῖς καὶ ἄνανδροι, ἀνδροφόνων μὲν ἐγκλήματα ἔχοντες, ἀπολωλεκότες δὲ τὴν πάντιμον καὶ ἔνδοξον καὶ ξωοποιὸν προσηγορίαν.
 ταῦτα δὴ οἱ λοιποὶ θεωροῦντες ἐστηρίχθησαν, καὶ οἱ this way they would vindicate their gods.
 Αnd he was thrown into prison scarcely breathing and after two days yielded up the ghost.
 “ Then a great ffispensation ofGodwas given, and the measureless mercy of Jesuswasso manifested,as has rarely happened among the brethren, but is not beyond the skillof Christ.
 For those who at the nrstarresthad denied were imprisoned themselves and shared in the terrors, for this time not even their denial was any advantage to them;
 but those who confessed what they were Were imprisonedas Christians,no other accusation being brought against them, the others however were held as murderers and foul persons and punished twiee as much asthe rest.
 For the burden of the former was lightened by the joy of martyrdom and the hopeofthe promises, and by love towards Christ and by the spirit of the Father;
 but the latter were greauy punished by their conscience so that they were conspicuous among all the rest by their faces when they were taken out.
 For the one went forth gladly;
 glory and great grace were mingled on their faces, so that they wore even their fetters asa becoming ornament, like a bride adorned with golden laceof many pattems, and they were perfumed with the sweet savour οf Christ, so that some supposed that they had been anointed with worldly unguents;
 but the others were depressed and humble and wretched and ffiled with every kind of unseemliness, and in addition were insulted by the heathen as ignoble and cowardly;
 they had gained the accusation οf murder, but had lost the name which is full of honour and glory and gives life.
 wben the others saw this they were strengthened and those who συλλαμβανόμενοι ἀδιατάκτως ὡμολόγουν, μηδὲ ἔννοιαν ἔχοντες διαβολικοῦ λογισμοῦ.
 ” Τούτοις μεταξύ τινα ἐπειπόντες, αὗθις ἐπιφέρουσιν·
 “ μετὰ ταῦτα δὴ λοιπὸν εἰς πᾶν εἶδος διῃρεῖτο τὰ μαρτύρια τῆς ἐξόδου αὐτῶν.
 ἐκ διαφόρων γὰρ χρωμάτων καὶ παντοίων ἀνθῶν ἕνα πλέξαντες στέφανον προσήνεγκαν τῷ πατρί·
 ἐχρῆν δ’ οὖν τοὺς γενναίους ἀθλητὰς ποικίλον ὑπομείναντας ἀγῶνα καὶ μεγάλως νικήσαντας ἀπολαβεῖν τὸν μέγαν τῆς ἀφθαρσίας στέφανον.
 ὁ μὲν οὖν Μάτουρος καὶ ὁ Σάγκτος καὶ ἡ Βλανδῖνα καὶ Ἄτταλος ἤγοντο ἐπὶ τὰ θηρία εἰς τὸ δημόσιον καὶ εἰς κοινὸν τῶν ἐθνῶν τῆς ἀπανθρωπίας θέαμα, ἐπίτηδες τῆς τῶν θηριομαχίων ἡμέρας διὰ τοὺς ἡμετέρους διδομένης.
 καὶ ὁ μὲν Μάτουρος καὶ ὁ Σάγκτος αὖθις διῄεσαν ἐν τῷ ἀμφιθεάτρῳ διὰ πάσης κολάσεως, ὡς μηδὲν ὅλως προπεπονθότες, μᾶλλονδ’ ὡς διὰ πλειόνων ἤδη κλήρων ἐκβεβιακότες τὸν ἀντίπαλον καὶ περὶ τοῦ στεφάνου αὐτοῦ τὸν ἀγῶνα ἔχοντες, ὑπέφερον πάλιν τὰς διεξόδους τῶν μαστίγων τὰς ἐκεῖσε εἰθισμένας καὶ τοὺς ἀπὸ τῶν θηρίων ἑλκηθμοὺς καὶ πάνθ’ ὃσα μαινόμενος ὁ δῆμος, ἄλλοι ἀλλαχόθεν, ἐπεβόων καὶ ἐπεκελεύοντο, ἐπὶ πᾶσιν τὴν σιδηρᾶν καθέδραν, ἐφ’ ἦς τηγανιξόμενα τὰ σώματα κνίσης αὐτοὺς ἐνεφόρει.
 οἱ δ’ οὐδ’ οὕτως ἔληγον, ἀλλ’ ἔτι καὶ μᾶλλον ἐξεμαίνοντο, βουλόμενοι νικῆσαι τὴν ἐκείνων ὑπομονήν, καὶ οὐδ’ ὣς παρὰ Σάγκτου ἕτερόν τι εἰσήκουσαν παρ’ ἢν ἀπ’ ἀρχῆς εἴθιστο λέγειν τῆς ὁμολογίας φωνήν.
 were arrested confessed without hesitation and gave no thought to the argumentS of the devil.
” Αfter afew more sentences they go on again:
“ After this the testimony of their death fell into every kind of variety.
 For they wove various colours and all kinds of Rowers into one wreath to offertothe Father,and so itwas necessary for the noble athletes to undergoavaried conteSt, and after great victory to receive the great crown of immortality.
 Maturus and sanctus and Blandina and Αttalus were led forth tothevild beasts,to the public, 1 andtoa common exhibition οf the inhumanityofthe heathen,for the day of fighting with beasts was specially appointed for the Christians.
 Maturus and Sanctus passed again through all torture in the amphitheatre as though they had suffered nothing before, but ratheras though, having conquered the opponent in many bouts, 2 they were now strivingfor his crown, οnce more they ran the gauntlet inthe accustomed manner, endured the worrying of the wild beastS, and everything which the maddened public, some inοne way, some in another, were howlingfor and commanding, finally,the iron chairon which the roasting οf their own bodies clothed them with its reek.
 Their persecutors did not stop even here, but went on growing more and more furious, wishing to eonquer their endurance, yet gained nothing from sanctus beyond the sound of the confession Which he had been accustomed to make from the beginning.
 “ Οὗτοι μὲν οὗν, δι’ ἀγῶνος μεγάλου ἐπὶ πολὺ παραμενούσης αὐτῶν τῆς ψυχῆς, τοὔσχατον ἐτύθησαν, διὰ τῆς ἡμέρας ἐκείνης ἀντὶ πάσης τῆς ἐν τοῖς μονομαχίοις ποικιλίας αὐτοὶ θέαμα γενόμενοι τῷ κόσμῳ·
 ἡ δὲ Βλανδῖνα ἐπὶ ξύλου κρεμασθεῖσα προύκειτο βορὰ τῶν εἰσβαλλομένων θηρίων·
 ἢ καὶ διὰ του βλέπεσθαι σταυροῦ σχήματι κρεμαμένη διὰ τῆς εὐτόνου προσευχῆς πολλὴν προθυμίαν τοῖς ἀγωνιζομένοις ἐνεποίει, βλεπόντων αὐτῶν ἐν τῷ ἀγῶνι καὶ τοῖς ἔξωθεν ὀφθαλμοῖς διὰ τῆς ἀδελφῆς τὸν ὑπὲρ αὐτῶν ἐσταυρωμένον, ἵνα πείσῃ τοὺς πιστεύοντας εἰς αὐτὸν ὅτι πᾶς ὁ ὑπὲρ τῆς Χριστοῦ δόξης παθὼν τὴν κοινωνίαν ἀεὶ ἔχει μετὰ τοῦ ζῶντος θεοῦ.
 καὶ μηδενὸς ἁψαμένου τότε τῶν θηρίων αὐτῆς, καθαιρεθεῖσα ἀπὸ τοῦ ξύλου ἀνελήφθη πάλιν εἰς τὴν εἱρκτήν, εἰς ἄλλον ἀγῶνα τηρουμένη, ἵνα διὰ πλειόνων γυμνασμάτων νικήσασα, τῷ μὲν σκολιῷ ὄφει ἀπαραίτητον ποιήση τὴν καταδίκην, προτρέψηται δὲ τοὺς ἀδελφούς, ἡ μικρὰ καὶ ἀσθενὴς καὶ εὐκαταφρόνητος μέγαν καὶ ἀκαταγώνιατον ἀθλητὴν χριστὸν ἐνδεδυμένη, διὰ πολλῶν κλήρων ἐκβιάσασα τὸν ἀντικείμενον καὶ δι’ ἀγῶνος τὸν τῆς ἀφθαρσίας στεψαμένη στέφανον.
 “ Ὁ δὲ Ἄτταλος καὶ αὐτὸς μεγάλως ἐξαιτηθεὶς ὑπὸ τοῦ ὄχλου καὶ γὰρ ἢν ὀνομαστός), ἕτοιμος εἰσῆλθεν ἀγωνιάτης διὰ τὸ εὐαυνείδητον, ἐπειδὴ γνησίως ἐν τῆ Χπιστιανῇ συντάξει γεγυμνασμένος ἦν καὶ ἀεὶ μάρτυς ἐγεγόνει παρ’ ἡμῖν ἀληθείας.
 καὶ περιαχθεὶς κύκλῳ τοῦ ἀμφιθεάτρου, πίνακος αὐτὸν προάγοντος ἐν ᾧ ἐγέγραπτο Ρωμαϊστί‘ οὗτός ἐστιν Ἄτταλος ὁ Χριστιανός,’ καὶ τοῦ“ Thus aftera long time, when their life still remained in them through the great contest, they were at last sacrificed, having been madea spectacle to the worldthroughout that dayasa substitute forallthe variations of gladiatorial eontests;
 but Blandina was hung ona stake and offered asa prey to the wild beasts that werelet in.
 She seemed to be hanging in the shape ofa croSS, and by her continuous prayer gave great zeal to the combatants, while they looked οn during the cntest, and withtheir outward eyessaw in the formof their sisterhim who wascrueffiedfor them, to persuade those who believe on him that all who suffer for the glory of Christ have for ever fellowship with the living God Then when none of the beasts Would touch her she was taken down from the stake and brought baek into the jail, and was thus preserved for another contest, in order that by winning through more trials she might make irrevocable the condemnation of the crooked serpent, and might encourage the brethren;
 for small and weak and despised as she was, she had put on the great and invincible athlete, Christ;
 she had overcome the adversaryin many contests, and through the struggle had gained the crown of immortality.
“ But ΑttaluswaS himSelf loudly ealled for by the crowd, for hewas well known.
 Ηe went in,a ready combatant, for his conscience was clear, and he had been nobly trained in Christian discipline and had ever beena witness for truth among us.
 Ηe was led roundthe amphitheatre andaplacardwas earried beforehim on whichwaswrittenin Latin, This Attalus, the’ The people were very bitter δήμου σφόδρα σφριγῶντος ἐπ’ αὐτῷ, μαθὼν ὁ ἡγεμὼν ὅτι Ῥωμαῖός ἐστιν, ἐκέλευσεν αὐτὸν ἀναληφθῆναι μετὰ καὶ τῶν λοιπῶν τῶν ἐν τῇ εἱρκτὴ ὄντων, περὶ ὧν ἐπέστειλεν τῷ Καίσαρι καὶ περιέμενεν τὴν ἀπόφασιν τὴν ἀπ’ ἐκείνου.
 “ Ὁ δὲ διὰ μέσου καιρὸς οὐκ ἀργὸς αὐτοῖς οὐδὲ ἄκαρπος ἐγίνετο, ἀλλὰ διὰ τῆς ὑπομονῆς αὐτῶν τὸ ἀμέτρητον ἔλεος ἀνεφαίνετο χριστοῦ·
 διὰ γὰρ τῶν ζώντων ἐζωοποιοῦντο τὰ νεκρά, καὶ μάρτυρες τοῖς μὴ μάρτυσιν ἐχαρίζοντο, καὶ ἐνεγίνετο πολλὴ χαρὰ τῇ παρθένῳ μητρί, οὓς ὡς νεκροὺς ἐξέτρωσε, τούτους ζῶντας ἀπολαμβανούσῃ.
 δι’ ἐκείνων γὰρ οἱ πλείους τῶν ἠρνημένων ἀνεμετροῦντο καὶ ἀνεκυΐσκοντο καὶ ἀνεζωπυροῦντο καὶ ἐμάνθανον ὁμολογεῖν καὶ ζῶντες ἤδη καὶ τετονωμένοι προσῄεσαν τῷ βήματι, ἐγγλυκαίνοντος τοῦ τὸν μὲν θάνατον τοῦ ἁμαρτωλοῦ μὴ βουλομένου, ἐπὶ δὲ τὴν μετάνοιαν χρηστευομένου θεοῦ, γα καὶ πάλιν ἐπερωτηθῶσιν ὑπὸ τοῦ ἡγεμόνος.
 ἐπιστείλαντος γὰρ τοῦ Καίσαρος τοὺς μὲν ἀποτυμπανισθῆναι, εἰ δέ τινες ἀρνοῖντο, τούτους ἀπολυθῆναι, τῆς ἐνθάδε πανηγύρεως( ἔστιν δὲ αὕτη πολυάνθρωπος ἐκ πάντων τῶν ἐθνῶν συνερχομένων εἰς αὐτήν) ἀρχομένης συνεστάναι, ἀνῆγεν ἐπὶ τὸ βῆμα θεα- τρίζων τοὺς μακαρίους καὶ ἐμπομπεύων τοῖς ὄχλοις·
 δι’ ὃ καὶ πάλιν ἀνήταζεν, καὶ ὅσοι μὲν ἐδόκουν πολιτείαν‘ Ρωμαίων ἐσχηκέναι, τούτων ἀπέτεμνε τὰς κεφαλάς, τοὺς δὲ λοιποὺς ἔπεμπεν εἰς θηρία.
 ἐδοξάζετο δὲ μεγάλως ὁ Χριστὸς ἐπὶ τοῖς πρότερον ἀρνησαμένοις, τότε παρὰ τὴν τῶν ἐθνῶν ὑπόνοιαν ὁμολογοῦσιν.
 καὶ γὰρ ἰδίᾳ οὗτοι ἀνητάζοντο ὡς δῆθεν ἀπολυθησόμενοι, καὶ ὁμο-against him,but when the governor learnt that hewasa Roman, he commanded him to be put back with the rest, who werein the jail, about whom he had written to the emperor and was waiting for his reply.
“ But the interveningtimewas not idle or fruitless for them but through their endurance was manifested the immeasurable mercy of Christ, for through the living the dead were being quickened and martyrs gave grace to those who had denied.
 Αnd there was great joy tothe Virgin Mother who had miscarried with them as though dead, and was receiving them back alive.
 For through them the majority of those who had denied were again brought to birth1 and again conceived and quickened again, and learned to confess, and nowalive and vigorous, made happy by God who wills not the death of the sinner, but is Hnd towards repentance, went to the judgement- seat,in οrder that they might again be interrogated by the governor.
 For caesar had written that they should be tortured to death, but that if any should reeant they should be let go, and at the beginning οf the local feast( and this is widelyattendedby the eoncourse οfallthe heathen to it) the govemorled them to the judgement- seat, making a show and spectacle οf the blessed men to the mob.
 Ηe accordingly examined them again, beheaded all who appeared to possess Roman citizenship, and sent the rest tothe beasts.
 Αnd Christ was greatly glorified by those who had formerly denied but theu confessed contrary to the expectationofthe people.
 For they were examined by themselves with the intention of then letting them λογοῦντες προσετίθεντο τῷ τῶν μαρτύρων κλήρῳ·
 ἔμειναν δὲ ἔξω οἱ μηδὲ ἴχνος πώποτε πίστεως μηδὲ αἴσθησιν ἐνδύματος νυμφικοῦ μηδὲ ἔννοιαν φόβου θεοῦ σχόντες, ἀλλὰ καὶ διὰ τῆς ἀναστροφῆς αὐτῶν βλασφημοῦντες τὴν ὁδόν, τοῦτ’ ἐστὶν οἱ υἱοὶ τῆς ἀπωλείας, οἱ δὲ λοιποὶ πάντες τῆ ἐκκλησίᾳ προσετέθησαν·
 ὧν καὶ ἀνεταζομένων, Ἀλέξανδρός τις, Φρὺξ μὲν τὸ γένος, ἰατρὸς δὲ τὴν ἐπιστήμην, πολλοῖς ἔτεσιν ἐν ταῖς Γαλλίαις διατρίψας καὶ γνωστὸς σχεδὸν πᾶσιν διὰ τὴν πρὸς θεὸν ἀγάπην καὶ παρρησίαν τοῦ λόγου ἦν γὰρ καὶ οὐκ ἄμοιρος ἀποστολικοῦ χαρίσματος), παρεστὼς τῷ βήματι καὶ νεύματι προτρέπων αὐτοὺς πρὸς τὴν ὁμολογίαν, φανερὸς ἢν τοῖς περιεστηκόσιν τὸ βῆμα ὥσπερ ὠδίνων.
 ἀγανακτήσαντες δὲ οἱ ὄχλοι ἐπὶ τῷ τοὺς πρότερον ἠρνημένους μένους αὖθις ὁμολογεῖν, κατε- βόησαν τοῦ Ἀλεξάνδρου ὡς ἐκείνου τοῦτο ποιοῦντος, καὶ ἐπιστήσαντος τοῦ ἡγεμόνος καὶ ἀνετάσαντος αὐτὸν τίς εἴη, τοῦ δὲ φήσαντος ὅτι‘ ἀνετάσαντος ἐν ὀργῇ γενόμενος κατέκρινεν αὐτὸν πρὸς θηρία.
 καὶ τῆ ἐπιούσῃ εἰσῆλθεν μετὰ καὶ τοῦ Ἀττάλου, καὶ γὰρ καὶ τὸν Ἄτταλον τῷ ὄχλῳ χαριζόμενος ὁ ἡγεμὼν ἐξέδωκε πάλιν πρὸς θηρία·
 οἳ καὶ διὰ πάντων διελθόντες τῶν ἐν τῷ ἀμφιθεάτρῳ πρὸς κόλασιν ἐξηυρημένων ὀργάνων καὶ μέγιστον ὕπο, μείναντες ἀγῶνα, τοὔσχατον ἐτύθησαν καὶ αὐτοί, τοῦ μὲν Ἀλεξάνδρου μήτε στενάξαντος μήτε γρύξαντός τι ὅλως, ἀλλὰ κατὰ καρδίαν ὁμιλοῦντος τῷ θεῷ, ὁ δὲ Ἄτταλος, ὁπότε ἐπὶ τῆς σιδηρᾶς ἐπετέθη καθέδρας καὶ περιεκαίετο, ἡνίκα ἡ ἀπὸ τοῦ σώματος κνῖσα ἀνεφέρετο, ἔφη πρὸς τὸ πλῆθος τῇ‘ Ρωμαϊκῇ φωνῇ‘ ἰδοὺ τοῦτό ἐστιν ἀνθρώπους go, but confessedand were addedto the ranksof the martyrs.
 nose indeed remained without who had never had any vestigeof faith, nor perception οfthe bridal garment, nor idea οf the fear of God, but even tbrough their behaviour blasphemed the Way— they arethesons of perdition— but all therestwere added tothe church.
 when they too were being examineda certain Alexander,a Ρhrygian by race andaphysician by profession, who hadlivedin Gaul for many yearsand was known to almost everyone for his love toward ood and boldness of speech( for he was not without a share of the apostolic gift), stood by the judgement- seat and by signs encouraged them to confession, and seemed to those who were standing by as though he were in travail.
 But the crowd, angry that those who had formeriy denied were confessing again, howled at Αlexander as though he were responsible for this.
 The govemor summoned him and asked him who he was, and when he saida Christian,’ he flew intoa rage and him tothe beasts.
 Αnd the next day he went into the arena together with Αttalus;
 for to please the mob the governor had given Αttalus back to the beasts.
 ney passed through all the instruments οf torture which were preparedin the amphitheatre, and endureda great contest.
 Finally they too were sacrificed.
 Αlexander uttered neither groan nor moan at all, but conversedwith God in his heart, and Αttalus, when he was put on the iron chair and was being bumed, and the reek arose from his body, said to the crowd in Latm;
‘ Lo, this which ἐσθίειν, ὃ ποιεῖτε ὑμεῖς·
 ἡμεῖς δὲ οὔτε ἀνθρώπους ἐσθίομεν οὔθ’ ἕτερόν τι πονηρὸν πράσσομεν. ’
 ἐπερωτώμενος δὲ τί ὄνομα ἔχει ὁ θεός, ἀπεκρίθη’ ὁ θεὸς ὄνομα οὐκ ἔχει ὡς ἄνθρωπος.’
 Επὶ πᾶσι δὲ τούτοις τῆ ἐσχάτῃ λοιπὸν ἡμέρᾳ τῶν μονομαχίων ἢ Βλαωδῖνα πάλιν πεντεκαίδεκα μετὰ καὶ Ποντικοῦ, παιδαρίου ὡς πεντεκαίδεκα ἐτῶν, οἳ καὶ καθ’ ἡμέραν εἰσήγοντο πρὸς τὸ βλέπειν τὴν τῶν λοιπῶν κόλασιν·
 καὶ ἠναγκάζοντο ὀμνύναι κατὰ τῶν εἰδώλων αὐτῶν, καὶ διὰ τὸ ἐμμένειν εὐσταθῶς καὶ ἐξουθενεῖν αὐτοὺς ἠγριώθη πρὸς αὐτοὺς τὸ πλῆθος, ὡς μήτε τὴν ἡλικίαν τοῦ παιδὸς οἰκτεῖραι μήτε τὸ γύναιον θῆναι, πρὸς πάντα δὲ τὰ δεινὰ παρέβαλλον αὐτοὺς καὶ διὰ πάσης ἐν κύκλῳ διῆγον κολάσεως, ἐπαλλήλως ἀναγκάζοντες ὀμόσαι, ἀλλὰ μὴ δυνάμενοι τοῦτο πρᾶξαι.
 ὁ μὲν γὰρ Ποντικὸς ὑπὸ τῆς ἀδελφῆς παρωρμημένος, ὡς καὶ τὰ ἔθνη βλέπειν ὅτι ἐκείνη ἢν προτρεπομένη καὶ στηρίζουσα αὐτόν, πᾶσαν κόλασιν γενναίως ὑπομείνας ἀπέδωκεν τὸ πνεῦμα·
 ἡ δὲ μακαρία Βλανδῖνα πάντων ἐσχάτη, καθάπερ μήτηρ εὐγενὴς παρορμήσασα τὰ τέκνα καὶ νικηφόρους πρὸς τὸν βασιλέα, ἀναμετρουμένη καὶ αὐτὴ πάντα τὰ τῶν παίδων μετρουμένη ἔσπευδεν πρὸς αὐτούς, χαίρουσα καὶ ἀγαλλιωμένη ἐπὶ τῇ ἐξόδῳ, ὡς εἰς νυμφικὸν δεῖπνον κεκλημένη, ἀλλὰ μὴ πρὸς θηρία βεβλημένη·
 καὶ μετὰ τὰς μάστιγας, μετὰ τὰ θηρία, μετὰ τὸ τήγανον, τοὔσχατον εἰς γυργαθὸν βληθεῖσα ταύρῳ παρεβλήθη, καὶ ἱκανῶς ἀναβΛηθεῖσα πρὸς τοῦ ξῴου μηδὲ αἲσθησιν ἔτι τῶν συμβαινόντων ἔχουσα διὰ τὴν ἐλπίδα καὶ ἐποχὴν τῶν πεπιστευμένων καὶ you are doingis to eat men,but we neither eat men nor do anything else wicked.’
 Αnd whenwasasked whatnameGod has, he replied,‘ God has notaname asa man has. ’
“ In additiontoall this,on the lastday of the gladiatorial sports, Blanffina was again brought in with Ponticus, a boy of about fifteen years old, and they had been brought in every day to see the torture of the others, and efforts were made to force them to swear by the idols, and the mob was furiolls against them beeause they had remained steadfast and disregarded them, so that therewas neither pityfor the youth οftheboy nor respeetforthe sex οf the woman.
 They exposed them to all the terrors and put them through every torturein turn, trying to make them swear, but not being able to do so.
 For Ronticus was encouraged by the Christian sister, so that even the heathen saw that she was exhorting and rtrengthening him, and after nobly enduring every torture he gave up his spirit.
 But the blessed Blandina, last οf all, like a noble mother who had encouraged her children and sent them forth triumphant to the king, having herself endured all the tortures of the cffildren, haStened to them, rejoicing and glad at her departureas though invited to a marriage feast rather than cast to the beaSts.
 Αnd after scourging, after the beasts, after the gridiron, she wasat last putina net and throwntoa bull.
 she was tossed about a long time by the beast, haring no more feeling for what happened to her through her hope and hold on what had been en- ΕUsΕBIUs ὁμιλίαν πρὸς Χριστόν, ἐτύθη καὶ αὐτή, καὶ αὐτῶν ὁμολογούντων τῶν ἐθνῶν ὅτι μηδεπώποτε παρ’ αὐτοῖς γυνὴ τοιαῦτα κοὶ τοσαῦτα ἔπαθεν.
 “‘ Αλλ’ οὐδ’ οὕτως κόρον ἐλάμβανεν αὐτῶν ἡ μανία καὶ ἡ πρὸς τοὺς ἁγίους ὠμότης.
 ὑπὸ γὰρ ἀγρίου θηρὸς ἄγρια καὶ βάρβαρα φῦλα ταραχθέντα δυσπαύστως εἶχεν, καὶ ἄλλην ἰδίαν ἀρχὴν ἐπὶ τοῖς σώμασιν ἐλάμβανεν ἢ ὕβρις αὐτῶν·
 τὸ γὰρ νενικῆσθαι αὐτοὺς οὐκ ἐδυσώπει διὰ τὸ μὴ ἔχειν ἀνθρώπινον ἐπιλογισμόν, μᾶλλον δὲ καὶ ἐξέκαιεν αὐτῶν τὴν ὀργὴν καθάπερ θηρίου, καὶ τοῦ ἡγεμόνος καὶ τοῦ δήμου τὸ ὅμοιον εἰς ἡμᾶς ἄδικον ἐπιδεικνυμένων μῖσος, ἵνα ἡ γραφὴ πληρωθῇ ὁ ἄνομος ἀνομησάτω ἔτι, καὶ ὁ δίκαιος δικαιωθήτω ἔτι.’
 καὶ γὰρ τοὺς ἐναποπνιγέντας τῆ εἱρκτῇ παρέραλλον κυσίν, ἐπιμελῶς παραφυλάσσοντες νύκτωρ καὶ μεθ’ ἡμέραν μὴ κηδευθῇ τις ὑφ’ ἡμῶν·
 καὶ τότε δὴ προθέντες τά τε τῶν θηρίων τά τε τοῦ πυρὸς λείψανα, πῇ μὲν ἐσπαραγμένα, πῇ δὲ ἠνθρακευμένα, καὶ τῶν λοιπῶν τὰς κεφαλὰς σὺν τοῖς ἀποτμήμασιν αὐτῶν ὡσαύτως ἀτάφους παρεφύλαττον μετὰ στρατιωτικῆς ἐπιμελείας ἡμέραις συχναῖς.
 καὶ οἱ μὲν ἐνεβριμοῦντο καὶ ἔβρυχον τοὺς ὀδόντας ἐπ’ αὐτοῖς, ζητοῦντές τινα περισσοτέραν ἐκδίκησιν παρ’ αὐτῶν λαβεῖν, οἱ δὲ ἐνεγέλων καὶ ἐπετώθαζον, μεγαλύνοντες ἅμα τὰ εἴδωλα αὐτῶν καὶ ἐκείνοις προσάπτοντες τὴν τούτων τιμωρίαν, οἱ δὲ ἐπιεικέστεροι καὶ κατὰ ποσὸν συμπαθεῖν δοκοῦντες ὠνείδιζον πολύ, λέγοντες ποῦ ὁ θεὸς αὐτῶν καὶ τί αὐτοὺς ὤνησεν ἡ θρησκεία, ἢν καὶ πρὸ τῆς ἑαυτῶν εἵλαντο ψυχῆς;’
 κοὶ τὰ μὲν ἀπ’ ἐκείνων τοιαύτην εἶχε τὴν ποικιλίαν, trusted to her and her converse with ChriSt.
 And so she too was sacrificed, and the heathen themselves confessed that never before among them hada woman suffered so much andso long.
“ Not even thuswas their madnessand cruelty tothe SaintS satished, for, incited bya wild beast, 1 wild and barbarous tribes could scarcely stop, and their violenee began again in a new way on the bodies;
 for that they had been conquered 2 did not shame them, because they hadno human reason, but it rather inflamed their wrath as ofawild beast, and the governor and the people showed the like unrighteous hatred against us that the Scripture might be fulfilled, Let him that is unlawful be unlawful still, and he that iS righteous be righteouS’ For thoSe who had been strangled in the jail they threw to the dogs, and watched carefully night and day that none should be cared for by us.
 Then they threw out the remains left by the beasbandby the nre, torn and charred, and ror many days watched witha mihtary guard the heads of the rest, together with their trunks, all unburied.
 And some raged and gnashed their teeth at the iemains, seeking some further vengeance from them, others laughed and jeered, glorifying their idols and ascribingtothem the punishmentof the Christians, and the gentler, who seemedto havea little sympathy, mocked greatly, saying,‘ Where is their god and what good to them was their worship, which they preferred beyond their’ Their conduct thus τὰ δὲ καθ’ ἡμᾶς ἐν μεγάλῳ καθειστήκει πένθει διὰ τὸ μὴ δύνασθαι τὰ σώματα κρύψαι τῇ γῆ·
 οὔτε γὰρ νὺξ συνεβάλλετο ἡμῖν πρὸς τοῦτο οὔτε ἀργύρια ἔπειθεν οὔτε λιτανεία ἐδυσώπει, παντὶ δὲ τρόπῳ παρετήρουν, ὡς μέγα τι κερδανοῦντες, εἰ μὴ τύχοιεν ταφῆς.
 ” Τούτοις ἑξῆς μεθ’ ἕτερά φασιν·
 “ τὰ οὖν σώματα τῶν μαρτύρων παντοίως παραδειγματισθέντα καὶ αἰθριασθέντα ἐπὶ ἡμέρας ἕξ, μετέπειτα καέντα καὶ αἰθαλωθέντα ὑπὸ τῶν ἀνόμων κατεσαρώθη εἰς τὸν Ῥοδανὸν ποταμὸν πλησίον παραρρέοντα, ὅπως μηδὲ λείψανον αὐτῶν φαίνηται ἐπὶ τῆς γῆς ἔτι.
 καὶ ταῦτ’ ἔπραττον ὡς δυνάμενοι νικῆσαι τὸν θεὸν καὶ ἀφελέσθαι αὐτῶν τὴν παλιγγενεσίαν, ἵνα, ὡς ἔλεγον ἐκεῖνοι, μηδὲ ἐλπίδα σχῶσιν ἀναστάσεως, ἐφ’ ᾗ πεποιθότες ξένην τινὰ καὶ καινὴν εἰσάγουσιν ἡμῖν θρῃακείαν καὶ καταφρονοῦσι τῶν δεινῶν, ἕτοιμοι καὶ μετὰ χαρᾶς ἥκοντες ἐπὶ τὸν θάνατον·
 νῦν ἴδωμεν εἰ ἀναστήσονται καὶ εἰ δύναται βοηθῆσαι αὐτοῖς ὁ θεὸς αὐτῶν καὶ ἐξελέσθαι ἐκ τῶν χειρῶν ἡμῶν. ’
” II.
 τοιαῦτα καὶ τὰ κατὰ τὸν δεδηλωμένον αὐτοκράτορα ταῖς Χριστοῦ συμβέβηκεν ἐνηργημένα ἀφ’ ὧν καὶ τὰ ἐν ταῖς λοιπαῖς ἐπαρχίαις ἐνηργημένα εἰκότι λογισμῷ στοχάζεσθαι πάρεστιν.
 ἄξιον τού.
 ἐκ τῆς αὐτῆς ἐπισυνάψαι γραφῆς λέξεις ἑτέρας, δι’ ὧν τὸ ἐπιεικὲς καὶ φιλάνθρωπον τῶν δεδηλωμένων μαρτύρων ἀναγέγραπται τούτοις αὐτοῖς τοῖς ῥήμασιν.
 “ οἳ καὶ ἐπὶ τοσοῦτον ζηλωταὶ καὶ μιμηταὶ χριστοῦ ἐγένοντο, ὃς ἐν μορφῇ θεοῦ ὑπάρχων οὐχ ἁρπαγμὸν ἡγήσατο τοι εἷναι ἴσα θεῷ, ὥστε ἐν τοιαύτῃ δόξη ὑπάρχοντες καὶ οὐχ ἅπαξ varied,but in οur cirelegreatgrief obtained, because we could not bury the bodies in the earth, for night did not avail us for this, nor did money persuade nor entreaty shame, but in every way they watehed, as though they would make some great gain, that the bodies should not obtain burial.
” Further on they say:
“ Thus the bodies οf the martyrs, after having been exposed and insulted in every wayfor six days, and afterwards burned and turned to ashes, were swept by the wicked into the river Rhone which flows near by, that not even a relic of them might still appear upon the earth.
 Αnd this they did as though they could coquer God and take away their rebirthin order,as they said,‘ that they might not even have any hope of resurrection, through trusting in which they have brought in strange and new worship and despised terrors, going readily and with joy to death;
 now let us see if they willrise again, and if their God be able to help them and to take them out of our hands. ’
” II.
 Such things happened to the churehes of Christ under the emperor mentioned, and from them it is possibleto from a reasonable conclusion as to what was doneinthe other provinces.
 It is worth while to add other statements fromthe same document, in which the genueness and the kindness of the martyrs already mentioned have been set down in these very words.
“ And they carriedso far their zealandimitation οf Christ,‘ who being in theform of God,thoughtit not robberytobe equal with God,’ that foralltheir glory, and though they had οὐδὲ δὶς ἀλλὰ πολλάκις μαρτυπήσαντες καὶ ἐκ θηρίων αὖθις ἀναληφθέντες καὶ τὰ καυτήρια καὶ τοὺς μώλωπας καὶ τὰ τραύματα ἔχοντες περι- κείμενα, οὔτ’ αὐτοὶ μάρτυρας ἑαυτοὺς ἀνεκήρυττον οὔτε μὴν ἡμῖν ἐπέτρεπον τούτῳ τῷ ὀνόματι προσαγορεύειν αὐτούς, ἀλλ’ εἴ ποτέ τις ἡμῶν δι’ ἐιστολῆς ἢ διὰ λόγου μάρτυρας αὐτοὺς προσεῖπεν, ἐπέπλησσον πικρῶς.
 ἡδέως γὰρ παρεχώρουν τὴν τῆς μαρτυρίας προσηγορίαν τῷ Χριστῷ, τῷ πιστῷ καὶ ἀληθινῷ μάρτυρι καὶ πρωτοτόκῳ τῶν νεκρῶν καὶ ἀρχηγῷ τῆς ζωῆς τοῦ θεοῦ, καὶ ἐπεμιμνήσκοντο κον- τῶν ἐξεληλυθότων ἤδη μαρτύρων καὶ ἔλεγονἴ’ ἐκεῖνοι ἤδη μάρτυρες, οὓς ἐν τῇ ὁμολογίᾳ Χριστὸς ἠξίωσεν ἀναληφθῆναι, ἐπισφραγισάμενος αὐτῶν διὰ τῆς ἐξόδου τὴν μαρτυρίαν, ἡμεῖς δὲ ὁμόλογοι μέτριοι καὶ ταπεινοί, καὶ μετὰ δακρύων παρεκάλουν τοὺς ἀδελφοὺς δεόμενοι ἵνα ἐκτενεῖς εὐχαὶ γίνωνται πρὸς τὸ τελειωθῆναι αὐτούς.
 καὶ τὴν μὲν δύναμιν τῆς μαρτυρίας ἔργῳ ἐπεδείκνυντο, πολλὴν παρρησίαν ἄγοντες πρὸς τὰ ἔθνη, καὶ τὴν εὐγένειαν διὰ τῆς ὑπομονῆς καὶ ἀφοβίας καὶ ἀτρομίας φανερὰν ἐποίουν, τὴν δὲ πρὸς τοὺς ἀδελφοὺς τῶν μαρτύρων προσηγορίαν παρῃτοῦντο, ἐμπεπλησμένοι φόβου θεοῦ.
” Καὶ αὖθις μετὰ βραχέα φασίν·
 “ ἐταπείνουν ἑαυτοὺς ὑπὸ τὴν κραταιὰν χεῖρα, ὑφ’ ἧς ἱκανῶς νῦν εἰσιν ὑψωμένοι.
 τότε δὲ πᾶσι μὲν ἀπελογοῦντο, κατηγόρουν δὲ οὐδενός·
 ἔλυον ἅπαντας, ἐδέσμευον testified not once οr twice but many times, and had been taken back from the beasts and were covered with burns and scars and wounds, they neither proclaimed themselves as martyrs, nor allowed us to address them by this title.
 But if ever any one of us called them martyrs either in a letter οr in speech they rebuked him sharply.
 For they gladly conceded the title ofmartyrdom to Christ, the frialthful and true martyr1 and first- born from the deadand author of the lifeof God.
 Αnd they reminded us of the martyrs who had already passed away, and said‘ they are already martyrs, whom Christ vouchsafed to be taken up at their confession, and sealed their witness by their departure, but we are lowly and humble’2 Αnd they besought the brethren with tears, begging that earnest prayers might be made for their consecration.
 The power οf martyrdom they actually showed, having great boldness towardsthe heathen,and they made plain their nobleness by endurance and absence of fear or timidity;
 but the title of martyr they refused from the brethren, for they were filled with the fear οf God.
” Α little further οn they say:
“ They humbled themselves under the mighty hand and by it they have now been greatly exalted.
 At that time they made defencefor all men, against none did they bring accusation;
 they released all and bound none;
 δὲ οὐδένα·
 καὶ ὑπὲρ τῶν τὰ δεινὰ διατιθέντων ηὔχοντο, καθάπερ Στέφανος ὁ τέλειος μάρτυς‘ κύριε, μὴ αὐτοῖς αὐτοῖς τὴν ἁμαρτίαν ταύτην.’
 εἰ δ’ ὑπὲρ τῶν λιθαζόντων ἐδέετο, πόσῳ μᾶλλον ὑπὲρ τῶν ἀδελφῶν.
” Καὶ αὖθίς φασι μεθ’ ἕτερα·
 “ οὗτος γὰρ καὶ μέγιστος αὐτοῖς πρὸς αὐτὸν ὁ πόλεμος ἐγένετο διὰ τὸ γνήσιον τῆς ἀγάπης, ἵνα ἀποπνιχθεὶς ὁ θὴρ οὓς πρότερον ᾤετο καταπεπωκέναι, ζῶντας ἐξεμέσῃ.
 οὐ γὰρ ἔλαβον καύχημα κατὰ τῶν πεπτωκότων, ἀλλ’ ἐν οἷς ἐπλεόναζον αὐτοί, τοῦτο τοῖς ἐνδεεστέροις ἐπήρκουν μητρικὰ σπλάγχνα ἔχοντες, καὶ πολλὰ περὶ αὐτῶν ἐκχέοντες δάκρυα πρὸς τὸν πατέρα, ζωὴν ᾐτήσαντο, καὶ ἔδωκεν αὐτοῖς·
 ἢν καὶ συνεμερίσαντο τοῖς πλησίον, κατὰ πάντα νικηφόροι πρὸς θεὸν ἀπελθόντες.
 εἰρήνην ἀγαπήσαντες ἀεὶ καὶ εἰρήνην ἡμῖν παρεγγυήσαντες, μετ’ εἰρήνης ἐχώρησαν πρὸς θεόν, μὴ καταλιπόντες πόνον τῇ μητρὶ μηδὲ στάσιν καὶ πόλεμον τοῖς ἀδελφοῖς ἀλλὰ χαρὰν καὶ εἰρήνην καὶ ὁμόνοιαν καὶ ἀγάπην.
 ” ταῦτα καὶ περὶ τῆς τῶν μακαρίων ἐκείνων πρὸς τοὺς παραπεπτωκότας τῶν ἀδελφῶν στοργῆς ὠφελίμως προκείσθω τῆς ἀπανθρώπου καὶ ἀνηλεοῦς ἕνεκα διαθέσεως τῶν μετὰ ταῦτα ἀφειδῶς τοῖς χριστοῦ μέλεσιν προσενηνεγμένων.
 III.
 Ἡ δ’ αὐτὴ τῶν προειρημένων μαρτύρων γραφὴ καὶ ἄλλην τινὰ μνήμης ἀξίαν ἱστορίαν περιέχει, ἣν καὶ οὐδεὶς ἂν γένοιτο φθόνος μὴ οὐχὶ τῶνand they Ρrayedfor those whohad inflicted torture, evenasdid Stephen,the perfect martyr,‘ Lord, lay not this sin to their’ Αnd if he prayedfor those who were stoning him how much more for the brethren?”Αnd again after οther details, they Say:
“ For theirgreatest contes, through the genuineness of their love, was this, that the beast1 should be choked into throwing up alive those whom he had at first thought to have swallowed down.
 For they did not boastoverthe fallen,but from their own abundance supplied witha mother's love those that and shedding many tears for them to the Father, they prayedfor life,and he gave it to them, and they divided it among their neighbours, and then departed to God, having in all things carried off the victory.
 They ever loved Ρeace;
 peace they commended to us;
 and with peace they departed to God;
 for their mother2 they left behind no sorrow, and for the brethren no strifeand war,but glory, Ρeace, concord, and”Let this profitable extract suffice concerning the loveof those blessed ones for their brethren who had fallen, for the sake οf the inhuman and merciless disposition οf those who after these events acted unsparingly to the members οf Christ.
 3 ΙII.
 The same document οf the aforementioned martyrs contains also another story worthy οf memory,and none could grudge οur bringing it to ἐντευξομένων εἰς γνῶσιν προθεῖναι·
 ἔχει δὲ οὕτως.
 Ἀλκιβιάδου γάρ τινος ἐξ αὐτῶν πάνυ αὐχμηρὸν βιοῦντος βίον καὶ μηδενὸς ὅλως τὸ πρότερον μεταλαμβάνοντος, ἀλλ’ ἢ ἄρτῳ μόνῳ καὶ ὕδατι χρωμένου πειρωμένου τε καὶ ἐν τῆ εἱρκτῇ οὕτω διάγειν, Ἀττάλῳ μετὰ τὸν πρῶτον ἀγῶνα ὃν ἐν τῷ ἀμφιθεάτρῳ ἤνυσεν, ἀπεκαλύφθη ὅτι μὴ καλῶς ποιοίη ὁ Ἀλκιβιάδης μὴ χρώμενος τοῖς κτίσμασι τοῦ θεοῦ καὶ ἄλλοις τύπον σκανδάλου ὑπολειπόμενος.
 πεισθεὶς δὲ ὁ Ἀλκιβιάδης πάντων ἀνέδην μετελάμβανεν καὶ ηὐχαρίστει τῷ θεῷ·
 οὐ γὰρ μετελάμβανεν χάριτος θεοῦ ἦσαν, ἀλλὰ τὸ πνεῦμα τὸ ἅγιον ἦν σύμβουλον αὐτοῖς.
 καὶ ταῦτα μὲν ὡδὶ ἐχέτω.
 Τῶν δ’ ἀμφὶ τὸν Μοντανὸν καὶ Ἀλκιβιάδην καὶ Θεόδοτον περὶ τὴν Φρυγίαν ἄρτι τότε πρῶτον τὴν περὶ τοῦ προφητεύειν ὑπόληψιν παρὰ πολλοῖς ἐκφερομένων πΛεῖσται γὰρ οὖν καὶ ἄλλαι παραδοξοποιίαι τοῦ θείου χαρίσματος εἰς ἔτι τότε κατὰ διαφόρους ἐκκλησίας ἐκτελούμεναι πίστιν παρὰ πολλοῖς τοῦ κἀκείνους προφητεύειν παρεῖχον) καὶ δὴ διαφωνίας ὑπαρχούσης περὶ τῶν δεδηλωμένων, αὖθις οἱ κατὰ τὴν Γαλλίαν ἀδελφοὶ τὴν ἰδίαν κρίσιν καὶ περὶ τούτων εὐλαβῆ καὶ ὀρθοδοξοτάτην ὑποτάττουσιν, ἐκθέμενοι καὶ τῶν παρ’ αὐτοῖς τελειωθέντων μαρτύρων διαφόρους ἐπιστολάς, ἃς ἐν δεσμοῖς ἔτι ὑπάρχοντες τοῖς ἐπ’ Ἀσίας καὶ Φρυγίας ἀδελφοῖς διεχάραξαν, οὐ μὴν ἀλλὰ καὶ Ἐλευθέρῳ τῷ τότε Ῥωμαίων ἐπισκόπῳ, τῆς τῶν ἐκκλησιῶν εἰρήνης ἕνεκα πρεσβεύοντες.
 the knowledge οf those who are about to study.
 It runs thus:
 There was among thema certain Alcibiades, who was living a very austere life, and at first was not partaking οf anything at all, but used merely bread and water and was trying to live thus even in the jail.
 But it was revealed to Attalus after the first contest which he underwent in the amphitheatre that Alcibiades was not doing well in not makinguseοf the creations οf God, and offering an example of offence 1 to others.
 Alcibiades was persuaded and began to partake οf everything without restraint and gave thanks to God;
 for they were not without help from the grace of God but the Ηoly Spirit was their counsellor.
 Let this suffice for this point.
 Just at that timethe party οf MontanusandΑleibiades and TheodotusinΡhrygia began firsttoengender among many their views concerning prophecy( for the manyother wonderful worksofthe grace ofGodwhich Were still being wrought up to that timein divers churches produced the belief among many that they also were prophets), and when dissension arose about the persons mentioned the brethren in Gaul again formulated their οwn judgement, pious and most orthodox, concerning them, subjoining various letters from the martyrs who had been consecrated among them, which letters while they were still in prison they had composed for the brethren in Αsia and Ρhrygia, and alsofor Εleutherus, who was then bishop οf the Romans, and so they were ambassadors for the sake οf the peace of the churches.
 IV.
 Οἱ δ’ αὐτοὶ μάρτυρες καὶ τὸν Εἰρήναιον, πρεσβύτερον ἤδη τότ’ ὄντα τῆς ἐν Λουγδούνῳ παροικίας, τῷ δηλωθέντι κατὰ Ῥώμην ἐπισκόπῳ συνίστων, πλεῖστα τῷ ἀνδρὶ μαρτυροῦντες, ὡς αἱ τοῦτον ἔχουσαι τὸν τρόπον δηλοῦσι φωναί·
 “ χαίρειν ἐν θεῷ ἄε πάλιν εὐχόμεθα καὶ ἀεί, πάτερ Ἐλεύθερε.
 ταῦτά ἀοῖ τὰ γράμματα προετρεψάμεθα τὸν ἀδελφὸν ἡμῶν καὶ κοινωνὸν Εἰρήναιον διακομίσαι, καὶ παρακαλοῦμεν ἔχειν ἄε αὐτὸν ἐν παραθέσει ζηλωτὴν ὄντα τῆς διαθήκης Χριστοῦ.
 εἰ γὰρ ᾔδειμεν τόπον τινὶ δικαιοσύνην περιποιεῖσθαι, ὡς πρεσβύτερον ἐκκλησίας, ὅπερ ἐστὶν ἐπ’ αὐτῷ, ἐν πρώτοις ἂν παρεθέμεθα.
” Τί δεῖ καταλέγειν τὸν ἐν τῆ δηλωθείσῃ γραφῆ τῶν μαρτύρων κατάλογον, ἰδίᾳ μὲν τῶν ἀποτμήσει κεφαλῆς τετελειωμένων, ἰδίᾳ δὲ τῶν θηρσὶν εἰς βορὰν παραβεβλημένων, καὶ αὖθις τῶν ἐπὶ τῆς εἱρκτῆς κεκοιμημένων, τόν τε ἀριθμὸν τῶν εἰς ἔτι τότε περιόντων ὁμολογητῶν;
 ὅτῳ γὰρ φίλον, καὶ ταῦτα ῥᾴδιον πληρέστατα διαγνῶναι μετὰ χεῖρας ἀναλαβόντι τὸ σύγγραμμα, ὃ καἰ αὐτὸ τῆ τῶν μαρτύρων συναγωγῇ πρὸς ἡμῶν, ὡς γοῦν ἔφην, κατείλεκται.
 ἀλλὰ τὰ μὲν ἐπ’ Ἀντωνίνου τοιαύτα.
 V.
 τούτου δὴ ἀδελφὸν Μάρκον Αὐρήλιον Καίσαρα λόγος ἔχει Γερμανοῖς καὶ Σαρμάταις ἀντιπαραταττόμενον μάχη, δίψει πιεζομένης αὐτοῦ τῆς στρατιᾶς, ἐν ἀμηχανίᾳ γενέσθαι·
 τοὺς δ’ ἐπὶ τῆς Μελιτηνῆς οὕτω καλουμένης λεγεῶνος συνεστώσης διὰ πίστεως ἐξ ἐκείνου καὶ εἰς δεῦρο συνεστώσης ἐν τῆ πρὸς τοὺς πολεμίους παρατάξει γόνυ θέντας ἐπὶ γῆν κατὰ τὸ οἰκεῖον ἡμῖν τῶν εὐχῶν ἔθος ἐπὶ IV.
 Irenaeus also, who was at that timealreadya presbyter of thediocese at Lyons, the same martyrs commended to the afore- mentioned bishopοf Rome, and gave him much good testimony, as is shown by words to the following effect :
“ Once more and always, Father Εleutherus, we wish you greeting in God.
 We have asked our brotherandcompanion, Irenaeus, to bring this letter to you andwe beg you to hold himin esteem, for he is Ζealous for the covenant οf Christ.
 For had we known that rank can confer righteousness οn anyone, we should first of all have recommended him as beinga presbyter ofthe church, for that is his position.
” What needisthere to transcribethelist οf the martyrsin the abovementioned document, some consecrated by beheading, some cast out to be eaten bythe wild beasts, οthers who fell asleepin the jail, and thenumber of the confessorswhich still survived at that time?For whoever wishes can easily read the full aecount by taking the description which has been included in our collectionof martyrs,1 asI said before.
 Such were the events which happened under Αntοninus.
 V.
 It is said that when his brother, Marcus Aurelius Caesar, was engaging in battle with the Germans and Sarmatians, he was in difficulties, because his army was oppressed by thirst;
 but the soldiers of the legion which is called after Melitene, 2 knelton the ground according to our own custom οf prayer, in the faith which has sustained them from that time to this in their contests with their enemies, and turned τὰς πρὸς τὸν θεὸν ἱκεσίας τραπέσθαι, παραδόξου δὲ τοῖς πολεμίοις τοῦ τοιούτου δὴ θεάματος φανέντος, ἄλλο τι λόγος ἔχει παραδοξότερον ἐπικαταλαβεῖν αὐτίκα, σκηπτὸν μὲν εἰς φυγὴν καὶ ἀπώλειαν συνεΛαύνοντα τοὺς πολεμίους, ὄμβρον δὲ ἐπὶ τὴν τῶν τὸ θεῖον παρακεκληκότων στρατιάν, πᾶσαν αὐτὴν ἐκ τοῦ δίψους μέλλουσαν ὅσον οὔπω διαφθείρεσθαι ἀνακτώμενον.
Η δ’ ἰατορίᾳ φέρεται μὲν καὶ παρὰ τοῖς πόρρω τοῦ καθ’ ἡμᾶς λόγου συγγραφεῦσιν οἷς μέλον γέγονεν τῆς κατὰ τοὺς δηλουμένους γραφῆς, δεδήλωται δὲ καὶ πρὸς τῶν ἡμετέρων.
 ἀλλὰ τοῖς μὲν ἔξωθεν ἱστορικοῖς, ἅτε τῆς πίστεως ἀνοικείοις, τέθειται μὲν τὸ παράδοξον, οὐ μὴν καὶ ταῖς τῶν ἡμετέρων εὐχαῖς τοῦθ’ ὡμολογήθη γεγονέναι·
 τοῖς δέ γε ἡμετέροις, ἅτε ἀληθείας φίλοις, ἁπλῷ καὶ ἀκακοήθει τρόπῳ τὸ πραχθὲν παραδέδοται.
 τούτων δ’ ἂν εἴη καὶ Ἀπολινάριος, ἐξ ἐκείνου φήσας τὴν δι’ εὐχῆς τὸ παράδοξον πεποιηκυῖαν λεγεῶνα οἰκείαν τῷ γεγονότι πρὸς τοῦ βασιλέως εἰληφέναι προσηγορίαν, κεραυνοβόλον τῆ Ῥωμαίων ἐπικληθεῖσαν φωνῇ.
 μάρτυς δὲ τούτων γένοιτ’ ἄν ἀξιόχρεως ὁ Τερτυλλιανός, τὴν Ῥωμαϊκὴν τῇ συγκλήτῳ προσφωνήσας ὑπὲρ τῆς πίστεως ἀπολογίαν, ἧς καὶ πρόσθεν ἐμνημονεύσαμεν, τήν τε ἱστορίαν βεβαιῶν σὺν ἀποδείξει μείζονι καὶ ἐναργεστέρᾳ·
 γράφει δ’ οὖν καὶ αὐτός, λέγων Μάρκου τοῦ συνετωτάτου βασιλέως ἐπιστολὰς εἰς ἔτι νῦν φέρεσθαι ἐν αἷς αὐτὸς μαρτυρεῖ ἐν Γερμανίᾳ towards supplications to God.
 Now though this kind of spectacle seemed strange to the enemy, the story goes that another still more marvellous overcame them at once, for lightning drove the enemy to flight add destruction, and a shower falling on the army which had prayed to God, refreshed them all when they were on the point of destruction from thirst.
 The story is both told among writers who are foreign to our faith who have undertaken to write of the times of the above mentioned emperors, 1 and has also been recorded by Christians.
 By the heathen writers, inasmucb as they were strangers to the faith, the miracle is related, but it was not confessed that it happened through the prayers of the Christians;
 but in our own writers, inasmuch as they are the friends of truth, what happened has been described in a simply and harmless fashion.
 Αmong these would be also Apolinarius, who states that after that timethe legion which had wrought the miracle through prayer had receiveda name from the emperor appropriate to what had happened, and was called in Latin the“ Thundering’’2 Tertullian is alsoa worthy witnessof these things, who in addressing in Latin an apology for our faithto to the Senate, which we have quoted already, confirmed the story with more and clearer proof.
 In his writing he says that lettersof Marcus,the most prudent emperor,were still extant, in which he testifies himself that when his army was on the point ὕδατος ἀπορίᾳ μέλλοντα αὐτοῦ τὸν στρατὸν διαφθείρεσθαι ταῖς τῶν χριστιανῶν εὐχαῖς σεσῶσθαι, τοῦτον δέ φησιν καὶ θάνατον ἀπειλῆσαι τοῖς κατηγορεῖν ἡμῶν ἐπιχειροῦσιν·
 οἷς ὁ δηλωθεὶς ἀνὴρ καὶ ταῦτα προσεπιλέγει·
 “ ποταποὶ οὖν οἱ νόμοι οὗτοι, οὓς καθ’ ἡμῶν μόνων ἕπονται ἀσεβεῖς ἄδικοι ὠμοί;
 οὓς οὔτε Οὐεσπασιανὸς ἐφύλαξεν, καίτοι γε Ἰουδαίους νικήσας, οὓς Τραϊανὸς ἐκ μέρους ἐξουθένησεν, κωλύων ἐκζητεῖσθαι Χριστιανούς, οὓς οὔτε Ἀδριανός, καίτοι γε πάντα τὰ περίεργα πολυπραγμονῶν, οὔτε ὁ Εὐσεβὴς ἐπικληθεὶς ἐπεκύρωσεν.
” ἀλλὰ ταῦτα μὲν ὅπη τις ἐθέλοι, τιθέσθω·
 μετίωμεν δ’ ἡμεῖς ἐπὶ τὴν τῶν ἑξῆς ἀκολουθίαν.
 Ποθεινοῦ δὴ ἐφ’ ὅλοις τῆς ζωῆς ἔτεσιν ἐνενήκοντα σὺν τοῖς ἐπὶ Γαλλίας μαρτυρήσασιν τελειωθέντος, Εἰρήναιος τῆς κατὰ Λούγδουνον ἧς ὁ Ποθεινὸς ἡγεῖτο παροικίας τὴν ἐπισκοπὴν διαδέχεται·
 Πολυκάρπου δὲ τοῦτον ἀκουστὴν γενέσθαι κατὰ τὴν νέαν ἐμανθάνομεν ἡλικίαν.
 οὗτος τῶν ἐπὶ Ῥώμης τὴν διαδοχὴν ἐπισκόπων ἐν τρίτη συντάξει τῶν πρὸς τὰς αἱρέσεις παραθέμενος, εἰς Ἐλεύθερον, οὗ τὰ κατὰ τοὺς χρόνους ἡμῖν ἐξετάζεται, ὡς ἂν δὴ κατ’ αὐτὸν σπουδαζομένης αὐτῷ τῆς γραφῆς, τὸν κατάλογον ἵστησι, γράφων ὧδε·
 VI.
 “ θεμελιώσαντες οὖν καὶ οἰκοδομήσαντες οἱ μακάριοι ἀπόστολοι τὴν ἐκκλησίαν, Λίνῳ τὴν τῆς ἐπισκοπῆς λειτουργίαν ἐνεχείρισαν·
 τούτου τοῦ Λίνου Παῦλος ἐν ταῖς πρὸς Τιμόθεον ἐπιστολαῖς μέμνηται.
 διαδέχεται δ’ αὐτὸν Ἀνέγκλητος, μετὰ τοῦτον δὲ τρίτῳ τόπῳ ἀπὸ τῶν ἀποστόλων τὴν ἐπισκοπὴν κληροῦται Κλήμης, ὁ καὶ ἑορακὼς τοὺς μακαρίους οf destruction in Germany from lack οf water it had been saved by the Ρrayers of the Christians, and Tertullian says that the emperor also threatened death to those who attempted to accuse us.
 The author goes on as fohows:
“ What kindoflaws arethesewhich wicked, unrighteous,and cruel men use against us alone? Vespasian didnot observe them althoughheconquered the Jews.
 Trajan partially allowed them, but forbade Christians to be sought οut.
 Neither Ηadrian, though busyinall curious matters, nor Pius, as heis called, ratified them.
” But let these things be as anyone will, we must pass οn to the train of further events.
 When Ρothinus was consecrated with the martyrs in Gaul at the age of full ninety years, Irenaeus received the episcopacy οfthediocese in Lyons,1 of which Ροthinushadbeen the head, and we have been told that he had beena listener to Polycarp in his early youth.
 In his third book against the heresies he gives the succession οf the bishops in Rome asfaras Εleutherus, the eventsof whose days are now being discussedby us, as though his book had been composed at that time, and he gives the list, writing as follows.
 VI.
“ Therefore when the blessed apostles had found and built the church they gave the ministry of the episcopate to Linus.
 Paul mentioned this Linus in his epistleto Timothy.
 Anencletus succeeded him, and after him Clement obtained the episcopate in the third place from the apostles.
 He had seen the blessed apostles and ἀποστόλους καὶ συμβεβληκὼς αὐτοῖς καὶ ἔτι ἔναυλον τὸ κήρυγμα τῶν ἀποστόλων καὶ τὴν παράδοσιν πρὸ ὀφθαλμῶν ἔχων, οὐ μόνος·
 ἔτι γὰρ πολλοὶ ὑπελείποντο τότε ὑπὸ τῶν ἀποστόλων δεδιδαγμένοι.
 ἐπὶ τούτου οὖν τοῦ Κλήμεντος στάσεως οὐκ ὀλίγης τοῖς ἐν Κορίνθῳ γενομένης ἀδελφοῖς, ἐπέστειλεν ἡ ἐν Ῥώμη ἐκκλησία ἱκανωτάτην γραφὴν τοῖς Κορινθίοις, εἰς εἰρήνην συμβιβάζουσα αὐτοὺς καὶ ἀνανεοῦσα τὴν πίστιν αὐτῶν καὶ ἣν νεωστὶ ἀπὸ τῶν ἀποστόλων παράδοσιν εἰλήφει.
” Καὶ μετὰ βραχέα φησίν·
 “ τὸν δὲ Κλήμεντα τοῦτον διαδέχεται Εὐάρεστος καὶ τὸν ἀποστόλων Ἀλέξανδρος, εἶθ’ οὕτως ἕκτος ἀπὸ τῶν ἀποστόλων καθίσταται Ξύστος, μετὰ δὲ τοῦτον Τελεσφόρος, ὃς καὶ ἐνδόξως ἐμαρτύρησεν·
 ἔπειτα Ὑγῖνος, εἶτα Πῖος, μεθ’ ὃν Ἀνίκητος.
 διαδεξαμένου τὸν Ἀνίκητον Σωτῆρος, νῦν δωδεκάτῳ τόπῳ τὸν τῆς ἐπισκοπῆς τῶν ἀποστόλων κατέχει κλῆρον Ἐλεύθερος.
 τῆ αὐτῇ τάξει καὶ τῆ αὐτῇ διδαχῇ ἥ τε ἀπὸ τῶν ἀποστόλων ἐν τῆ ἐκκλησίᾳ παράδοσις καὶ τὸ τῆς ἀληθείας κήρυγμα κατήντηκεν εἰς ἡμᾶς.
” VII.
 Ταῦτα ὁ Εἰρήναιος ἀκολούθως ταῖς προδιεξοδευθείσαις ἡμῖν ὑπογραφὰς ἱστορίαις ἐν οἷς ἐπέγραφεν, πέντε οὐαὶ τὸν ἀριθμόν, Ἐλέγχου καὶ ἀνατροπῆς τῆς ψευδωνύμου γνώσεως, ἐν δευτέρῳ τῆς αὐτῆς ὑποθέσεως, ὅτι δὴ καὶ εἰς αὐτὸν ὑποδείγματα τῆς θείας καὶ παραδόξου δυνάμεως ἐν ἐκκλησίαις τισὶν ὑπολέλειπτο, διὰ τούτων ἐπισημαίνεται, conversed with them and the teaching of the apostles still rang in his ears, their tradition was held before his eyes.
 Nor was he alone in this, for there were still many surviving at that timewho had been taughtbythe apostles.
 When in the time οf this Clementno little dissenstion arose among the Chrirtiansat Corinth, the church in Rome senta most powerful letter to the Corinthians urging them to peace and renewing their faith and the tradition which they had recently received from the apostles.
 1 ” Αnd aftera little he says:
“ Εvarestus succeeded to this Clement and Αlexander to Εvarestus, and then Xystus was appointed as the sixth from the apostles, and afterhim Telesphorus, who also was martyred gloriously;
 then Hyginus, then Pius, after him Anicetus.
 Soter succeeded Anicetus, and now, in the twelfth place from the apostles, Eleutherus holds the lot of the episcopate.
 The tradition from the apostles in the churchand the preachingofthe truth have reached us in the same οrder and the same teaching.
 ” 2 VII.
 These things Irenaeus recounts, according tothe extracts whichwehave made already, in the books, five in number, to which he gave the title of Refutation and Overthrow of Knowledge falsely socalled, and in the second book of this work he proves in the following words that manifestations of the divine and marvellous power had remained in some λέγων·
“ τοσοῦτον δὲ ἀποδέουσιν τοῦ νεκρὸν ἐγεῖραι, καθὼς ὁ κύριος ἤγειρεν καὶ οἱ ἀπόστολοι διὰ προσευχῆς καὶ ἐν τῆ ἀδελφότητι πολλάκις διὰ τὸ ἀναγκαῖον καὶ τῆς κατὰ τόπον ἐκκλησίας πάσης αἰτησαμένης μετὰ νηστείας καὶ λιτανείας πολλῆς ἐπέστρεφεν τὸ πνεῦμα τοῦ τετελευτηκότος καὶ ἐχαρίσθη ὁ ἄνθρωπος ταῖς εὐχαῖς τῶν ἁγίων. ’
’ καὶ αὗθίς φησιν μεθ’ ἕτερα·
 “ εἰ δὲ καὶ τὸν κύριον φαντασιωδῶς τὰ τοιαῦτα πεποιηκέναι φήσουσιν, ἐπὶ τὰ προφητικὰ ἀνάγοντες αὐτούς, ἐξ αὐτῶν ἐπιδείξομεν πάντα οὕτως περὶ αὐτοῦ καὶ προειρῆσθαι καὶ γεγονέναι βεβαίως καὶ αὐτὸν μόνον εἶναι τὸν υἱὸν τοῦ θεοῦ·
 δι’ ὃ καὶ ἐν τῶ ἐκείνου ὀνόματι οἱ ἀληθῶς αὐτοῦ μαθηταί, πάρ’ αὐτοῦ λαβόντες τὴν χάριν ἐπιτελοῦσιν ἐπ’ εὐεργεσίᾳ τῆ τῶν λοιπῶν ἀνθρώπων, καθὼς εἷς ἕκαστος τὴν δωρεὰν εἴληφεν παρ’ αὐτοῦ.
 οἱ μὲν γὰρ δαίμονας ἐλαύνουσιν βεβαίως καὶ ἀληθῶς, ὥστε πολλάκις καὶ πιστεύειν ἐκείνους αὐτοὺς τοὺς καθαρισθέντας ἀπὸ τῶν πονηρῶν πνευμάτων καὶ εἶναι ἐν τῆ ἐκκλησίᾳ, οἱ δὲ καὶ πρόγνωσιν ἔχουσιν τῶν μελλόντων καὶ ὀπτασίας καὶ ῥήσεις προφητικάς, ἄλλοι δὲ τοὺς κάμνοντας διὰ τῆς τῶν χειρῶν ἐπιθέσεως ἰῶνται καὶ ὑγιεῖς ἀποκαθιστᾶσιν, ἤδη δέ, καθὼς ἔφαμεν, καὶ νεκροὶ ἠγέρθησαν καὶ παρ’.
 σὺν ἡμῖν ἔτεσιν ἱκανοῖς, καί, τί γάρ;
 οὐκ δ’ ἔστιν ἀριθμὸν εἰπεῖν τῶν χαρισμάτων ὧν κατὰ παντὸς τοῦ κόσμου ἢ ἐκκλησία παρὰ θεοῦ λαβοῦσα ἐν τῷ ὀνόματι Ἰησοῦ χριστοῦ τοῦ σταυρωθέντος ἐπί Ποντίου Πιλάτου ἑκάστης ἡμέρας ἐπ’ εὐεργεσίᾳ churches even as far as his time:
“ But they fallso far1 short ofraising the dead, as did the Lord and his apostles through prayer( and often amongthe brethren, because of necessity and at the request of the whole church in the neighbourhood, with fasting and much supplication, the spirit of him who had died returned, and the man was given to the prayers of the” Αnd again he says after other things:
“ But if theysay that the Lord has done all these things merely in appearance we will take them back to the prophetic writings, and show from them that all these things had been foretold concerning him, and that they certainly happened, and that he alone is the Som of God;
 for which cause also his true disciples having reeeived graee from him use it in his nameforthe benefit of therestof men, even as each has received the gift from him.
 For some drive out demons with certainty and truth, so that often those who have themselves been cleansed from the evil spirits believe and are in the church, and some have foreknowledge of things to be, and visions and prophetic speech, and others cure the rick by the haying on of hands and make them whole, and even as we have said, the dead have been raised and remained with us for many years.
 Αnd why shouldΙ say more7.
 Ιt is not possible to tell the numberof the gifts whichthe chureh throughoutthe whole worid, having received them from Godin the nameof Jesus Christ, who was crucified under Pontius Pilate, uses each day for the τῇ τῶν ἐθνῶν ἐπιτελεῖ, μήτε ἐξαπατῶσά τινας μήτε ἐξαργυριζομένη·
 ὡς γὰρ δωρεὰν εἴληφεν παρὰ θεοῦ, δωρεὰν καὶ διακονεῖ. ’
’ καὶ ἐν ἑτέρῳ δὲ τόπῳ ὁ αὐτὸς γράφει·
“ καθὼς καὶ πολλῶν ἀκούομεν ἀδελφῶν ἐν τῆ ἐκκλησίᾳ προφητικὰ χαρίσματα ἐχόντων καὶ παντοδαπαῖς λαλούντων διὰ τοῦ πνεύματος καὶ τὰ κρύφια τῶν ἀνθρώπων εἰς φανερὸν ἀγόντων ἐπὶ τῷ συμφέροντι καὶ τὰ μυστήρια τοῦ θεοῦ ἐκδιηγουμένων” ταῦτα καὶ περὶ τοῦ διαφορὰς χαρισμάτων μέχρι καὶ τῶν δηλουμένων χρόνων παρὰ τοῖς ἀξίοις διαμεῖναι.
 VIII.
 Ἐπεὶ δὲ ἀρχόμενοι τῆς πραγματείας ὑπόσχεσιν πεποιήμεθα παραθήσεσθαι κατὰ καιρὸν εἰπόντες τὰς τῶν ἀρχαίων ἐκκλησιαστικῶν πρεσβυτέρων τε καὶ συγγραφέων φωνὰς ἐν αἷς τὰς περὶ τῶν ἐνδιαθήκων γραφῶν εἰς αὐτοὺς κατελθούσας παραδόσεις παραδεδώκασιν, τούτων δὲ καὶ ὁ Εἰρήναιος ἦν, φέρε, καὶ τὰς αὐτοῦ παραθώμεθα λέξεις, καὶ πρώτας γε τὰς περὶ τῶν ἱερῶν ὲν ἀγγελίων, οὕτως ἐχούσας·
 “ ὁ μὲν δὴ Ματθαῖος ἐν τοῖς Ἑβραίοις τῆ ἰδίᾳ αὐτῶν διαλέκτῳ καὶ γραφὴν ἐξήνεγκεν εὐαγγελίου, τοῦ Πέτρου καὶ τοῦ Παύλου ἐν Ῥώηῃ εὐαγγελιζομένων καὶ θεμελιούντων τὴν ἐκκλησίαν·
 μετὰ δὲ τὴν τούτων ἔξοδον Μάρκος, ὁ μαθητὴς καὶ ἑρμηνευτὴς Πέτρου, καὶ αὐτὸς τὰ ὑπὸ Πέτρου κηρυσσόμενα ἐγγράφως ἡμῖν παραδέδωκεν·
 καὶ Λουκᾶς δέ, ὁ ἀκόλουθος Παύλου, τὸ ὑπ’ ἐκείνου κηρυσσόμενον εὐαγγέλιον ἐν βίβλῳ κατ- έθετο.
 ἔπειτα Ἰωάννης, ὁ μαθητὴς τοῦ κυρίου, ὁ καὶ ἐπὶ τὸ στῆθος αὐτοῦ ἀναπεσών, καὶ αὐτὸς ἐξέδωκεν τὸ εὐαγγέλιον, ἐν Ἐφέσῳ τῆς Λαίας διατρίβων.
” benefit ofthe heathen, deceiving none and making profit from none.
 For as it received freely from God, it ministers also” And in another place the same author writes:
“ Just as also we hear many brethren in the church who have gifts of prophecy, and who speak through the Spirit with all manner of tongues, and who bring the hidden things of men into clearness for the common good and expound the myrteries of ” So much on the point that variety of gifts remained among the worthy up till the time spoken of.
 VIII.
 Αt the beginning of this work we made promise to quote from time to time the sayings of the presbyters and writers of the church ofthe first period, in which they have delivered the traditions which came down to them about the canonical Scriptures.
 Now Irenaeus wasone of these, so letus quote his words, and in the first place those which refer to the saered Gospels, as follwos:
“ Now Matthew published among the Hebrews a written gospel 1 also in theirown tongue, while Ρeter and Paul were preaching in Rome and founding the church.
 But after their death Mark also, the disciple andinterpreter of Peter, himself handed down to us in writing the things which were preached by Ρeter, and Luke also, who wasa follower of Paul, put down inabook the gospel whichwas preached by him.
 Then John, the discipleof the Lord, who had even retedonhis breast, himself also gaveforth the gospel, while hewas living at Ephesusin Asia.
” Ταῦτα μὲν οὖν ἐν τρίτῳ τῆς εἰρημένης ὑποθέσεως τῷ προδηλωθέντι εἴρηται, ἐν δὲ τῷ πέμπτῳ περὶ τῆς Ἰωάννου Ἀποκαλύψεως καὶ τῆς ψήφου τῆς τοῦ ἀντιχρίστου προσηγορίας οὕτως διαλαμβάνει·
 “ τούτων δὲ οὕτως ἐχόντων καὶ ἐν πᾶσι δὲ τοῖς σπουδαίοις καὶ ἀρχαίοις ἀντιγράφοις τοῦ ἀριθμοῦ τούτου κειμένου καὶ μαρτυρούντων αὐτῶν ἐκείνων τῶν κατ’ ὄφιν τὸν Ἰωάννην ἑορακότων καὶ τοῦ λόγου διδάσκοντος ἡμᾶς ὅτι ὁ ἀριθμὸς τοῦ ὀνόματος θηρίου κατὰ τὴν Ἑλλήνων ψῆφον διὰ τῶν ἐν αὐτῷ γραμμάτων ἐμφαίνεται. ’
’ καὶ ὑπο- καταβὰς περὶ τοῦ αὐτοῦ φάσκει·
“ ἡμεῖς οὖν οὐκ ἀποκινδυνεύομεν μὲν περὶ τοῦ ὀνόματος τοῦ ἀντιχρίστου ἀποφαινόμενοι βεβαιωτικῶς.
 εἰ γὰρ ἔδει ἀναφανδὸν ἐν’ τῷ νῦν καιρῷ κηρύττεσθαι τού.
 νομᾶ αὐτοῦ, δι’ ἐκείνου ἂν ἐρρέθη τοῦ καὶ τὴν ἀποκάλυψιν ἑορακότος·
 οὐδὲ γὰρ πρὸ πολλοῦ χρόνου ἑωράθη, ἀλλὰ σχεδὸν ἐπὶ τῆς ἡμετέρας γενεᾶς, πρὸς τῷ τέλει τῆς Δομετιανοῦ ἀρχῆς.
 ” Ταῦτα καὶ περὶ τῆς Ἀποκαλύψεως ἱστόρηται τῷ δεδηλωμένῳ·
 μέμνηται δὲ καὶ τῆς Ἰωάννου πρώτης ἐπιστολῆς, μαρτυρίας ἐξ αὐτῆς πλείστας εἰσφέρων, ὁμοίως δὲ καὶ τῆς Πέτρου προτέρας.
 οὐ μόνον δὲ οἶδεν, ἀλλὰ καὶ ἀποδέχεται τὴν τοῦ Ποιμένος γραφήν, λέγων.
 “ καλῶς οὖν ἡ γραφὴ ἢ λέγουσα πρῶτον πάντων πίστευσον ὅτι εἷς ἐστιν ὁ θεὸς ὁ τὰ πάντα κτίσας καὶ καταρτίσας” καὶ τὰ ἑξῆς.
 καὶ ῥητοῖς δέ τισιν ἐκ τῆς Σολομῶνος Σοφίας κέχρηται, μόνον οὐχὶ φάσκων·
 “ ὅρασις These things were said by the writer referred to in the third book of his treatise which has been quoted before, and in the fifth book he discourses thus about the Apocalypse of John and the number of the name of the Antichrist.
 1 “ Now since this is so, and since this number is found in all the good and ancient copies, and sinee those Who have seem John faceto face testify, and reason teaches us that the number of the name of the beast appears according to the numeration of the Greeksbythe letters in it.
.
.
” Αnd goingon later he says concerning the same point,“ We therefore will not takethe risk of making any positive statement concerning the name of the Antichrist.
 For if it had been necessary for his name to have been announeed cleariy atthe present time, it would have been spoken by him who also sawthe Revelation;
 for it was not even seenalong time ago, but almost in our own generation towards the end of the reign of Domitian.
” The author quoted says thisabout the Apocalypse, and he also mentions the first Epistleof John, making many quotations from it, and likewisethe first Epistle of Ρeter.
 Αnd he not only knew but also received2 the writingof the Shepherd, saying,“ Well did the scripture say‘ first of all believe thatGodis one who createdand fitted together all’ and so”Ηe also made somequotationsall but verbally fromtheWiSdom of Solomon,“ Αnd δὲ θεοῦ περιποιητικὴ ἀφθαρσίας, ἀφθαρσία δὲ ἐγγὺς εἶναι ποιεῖ θεοῦ. ’
’ καὶ ἀπομνημονευμάτων’ δε ἀποστολικοῦ τινος πρεσβυτέρου, οὗ τοὔνομα σιωπῇ παρέδωκεν, μνημονεύει ἐξηγήσεις τε αὐτοῦ θείων γραφῶν παρατέθειται.
 ἔτι καὶ Ἰουστίνουῥ’’φ’ τοῦ μάρτυρος καὶ Ἰγνατίου μνήμην γραφέντων μαρτυρίαις αὗθις καὶ ἀπὸ τῶν τούτοις γραφέντων κεχρημένος, ἐπήγγελται δ’ αὐτὸς ἐκ τῶν Μαρκίωνος συγγραμμάτων ἀντιλέξειν αὐτῷ ἐν ἰδίῳ σπουδάσματι.
 Kαὶ περὶ τῆς κατὰ τοὺς ἑβδομήκοντα ἑρμηνείας τῶν θεοπνεύστων γραφῶν ἄκουε οἷα κατὰ λέξιν γράφει·
 “ ὁ θεὸς οὖν ἄνθρωπος ἐγένετο καὶ αὐτὸς κύριος ἔσωσεν ἡμᾶς, δοὺς τὸ τῆς παρθένου σημεῖον, ἀλλ’ οὐχ ὡς ἔνιοί φασιν τῶν νῦν τολμώντων μεθερμηνεύειν τὴν γραφήν, ‘ ἰδοὺ ἢ νεᾶνις ἐν γαστρὶ ἕξει καὶ τέξεται υἱόν’·
 ὡς Θεοδοτίων ἡρμήνευσεν ὁ Ἐφέσιος καὶ Ἀκύλας ὁ Ποντικός, ἀμφότεροι Ἰουδαῖοι προαήλυτοι, οἷς κατακολουθήσαντες οἱ Ἐβιωναῖοι ἐξ Ἰωσὴφ αὐτὸν γε·
 γενῆσθαι φάακουσιν.’
 ’ τούτοις ἐπιφέρει μετὰ βραχέα λέγων·
 “ πρὸ τοῦ γὰρ Ῥωμαίους κρατῦναι τὴν ἀρχὴν αὐτῶν, ἔτι τῶν Μακεδόνων τὴν Ἀσίαν κατεχόντων, Πτολεμαῖος ὁ Λάγου φιλοτιμοῦ μένος τὴν ὑπ’ αὐτοῦ κατεσκευασμένην βιβλιοθήκην ἐν Ἀλεξανδρείᾳ κοσμῆσαι τοῖς πάντων ἀνθρώπων Ἀλεξανδρείᾳ ὅσα γε σπουδαῖα ὑπῆρχεν, ᾐτήσατο παρὰ τῶν Ἱεροσολυμιτῶν εἰς τὴν Ἑλληνικὴν διάλεκτον ἀχεῖν αὐτῶν μεταβεβλημένας τὰς γραφάς.
 οἱ δέ, ὑπήκουον γὰρ ἔτι τοῖς Μακεδόσιν τότε, τοὺς παρ’ αὐτοῖς ἐμπειροτάτους τῶν γραφῶν καὶ ἀμφοτέρων τῶν διαλέκτων, ἑβδομήκοντα πρεσβυ- the vision of God produces incorruptibility and incorruptibility brings us near to”Ηe also quotes treatises οf a certain apostolic presbyter whose name he passes by in silence and gives his interpretaion οf divine Scripture.
 Moreover, he has made mention of Justion Martyr and Ignatius, making frequent quotations from their writings, and he promised to give ina special worka refutation of Marcion from his own writings.
 Hear also, word for word, what he writesabout the interpretation οf the inspiredScriptures accorffing to the Septuagint.
“ So God becameman and the Lordhimselfsaved us, giving us the signof the virgin, but notas some say, who at the presenttime venture totranslatethe scriptures,‘ beholdayoung woman shall conceive and bear a’ as Theodotion the Εphesian tranriated it and Αquila from Ρontus, both οf them Jewish proselytes, whom the Εbionites follow and aver that he was begotten by Joseph. ’
’ Aftera little he goes on thus :
 ‘‘ For before the Romans established their government, while the Macedonians still possessed Asia, Ρtolemy, the son of Lagus, 1 being very anxious to adorn the library, which he had founded in Αlexandria, with all the best extant writings of all men, asked from the inhabitants of Jerusalem to have their Scriptures translated into Greek.
 They, for theywere at that timestillsubject to the Macedonians, sent toPtolemy seventy elders, the most experienced they had τέρους, ἔπεμψαν Πτολεμαίῳ, ποιήσαντος τοῦ ὅπερ ἠβούλετο.
 ὁ δὲ ἰδίᾳ πεῖραν αὐτῶν λαβεῖν θελήσας εὐλαβηθείς τε μή τι ἄρα αυνθέμενοι ἀποκρύψωσι τὴν ἐν ταῖς γραφαῖς διὰ τῆς ἑρμηνείας ἀλήθειαν, χωρίσας αὐτοὺς ἀπ’ ἀλλήλων ἐκέλευσε τοὺς πάντας τὴν αὐτὴν ἑρμηνείαν γράφειν, καὶ τοῦτ’ ἐπὶ πάντων τῶν βιβλίων ἐποίησεν.
 συνελδόντων δὲ αὐτῶν ἐπὶ τὸ αὐτὸ παρὰ τῷ Πτολεμαίῳ καὶ συναντιβαλόντων ἑκάστου τὴν ἑαυτοῦ ἑρμηνείαν, ὁ μὲν θεὸς ἐδοξάσθη, αἱ δὲ γραφαὶ ὄντως θεῖαι ἐγνώσθησαν, τῶν πάντων τὰ αὐτὰ ταῖς αὐταῖς λέξεσιν καὶ τοῖς αὐτοῖς ὀνόμασιν ἀναγορευσάντων ἀπ’ ἀρχῆς μέχρι τέλους, ὥστε καὶ τὰ παρόντα ἔθνη γνῶναι ὅτι κατ’ ἐπίπνοιαν τοῦ θεοῦ εἰσιν ἑρμηνευμέναι αἱ γραφαί.
 καὶ οὐδέν γε θαυμαστὸν τὸν θεὸν τοῦτο ἐνηργηκέναι, ὅς γε καὶ ἐν τῇ ἐπὶ Ναβουχοδονόσορ αἰχμαλωσίᾳ τοῦ λαοῦ διαφθαρεισῶν τῶν γραφῶν καὶ μετὰ ἑβδομήκοντα ἔτη τῶν Ἰουδαίων ἀνελθόντων εἰς τὴν χώραν αὐτῶν, ἔπειτα ἐν τοῖς χρόνοις Ἀρταξέρξου τοῦ Περσῶν βασιλέως ἐνέπνευσεν Ἔσδρᾳ τῷ ἱερεῖ ἐκ τῆς φυλῆς Λευὶ τοὺς τῶν προγεγονότων προφητῶν πάντας ἀνατάξασθαι λόγους καὶ ἀποκαταστῆσαι τῷ λαῷ τὴν διὰ Μωυσέως νομοθεαίαν.
 ̈ τοσαῦτα ὁ Εἰρήναιος.
 IX.
 Ἐννέα δὲ καὶ δέκα ἔτεσιν τῇ βασιλείᾳ διαρκέσαντος Ἀντωνίνου, Κόμοδος τὴν ἡγεμονίαν παραλαμβάνει·
 οὗ κατὰ τὸ πρῶτον ἔτος τῶν κατ’ Ἀλεξάνδρειαν ἐκκλησιῶν Ἰουλιανὸς ἐγχειρίζεται τὴν ἐπισκοπήν, ἐπὶ δυοκαίδεκα ἔτεσιν Ἀγριππίνου τὴν λειτουργίαν ἀποπΛήσαντος.
 in the scriptures andin both languages, and God thus wrought what he willed.
 But Ptolemy, wishing to make trial of them inhis own way, and being afraid lest they should have made some agreement to conceal by their translation the truthin the Scriptures, separated themfrom one anotherand commanded themall to writethe same translation.
 Αnd this he did in the case of all the books.
 when they came together to Ptolemy,and compared each his own translation, God was glorffied and scriptures were recognizedas truly divine, for they all rendered the same things in the same words and the same names, from beginningto end, so that even the heathen who were present knew that the Scriptures had been translated by the inspiration of God.
 Αnd it is no marvel thatGoddid this, for when the Scriptures had been destroyed in the captivity οf the people in the days of Nebuchadnezzar, and the Jews had gone back to their country after seventy years, then in the times of Artaxerxes, the king of the Ρersians,he inspired Ezra, the priest of the tribeof Levi, to restore all the sayingS of the prophets Whohad gone before, and to restore to the people the law given by” 1 so much sayS Irenaeus.
 IX.
 When Antoninus had held the empire for nineteen years, Commodus 2receivedthe sovereignty,and in his first year Julian was appointed to the episcopate of the Churches in Αlexandria when Agrippinus had completed his ministry after twelve years.
 X.
 Ἡγεῖτο δὲ τηνικαῦτα τῆς τῶν πιστῶν αὐτόθι διατριβῆς ἀνὴρ κατὰ παιδείαν ἐπιδοξότατος, ὄνομα αὐτῷ Πάνταινος, ἐξ ἀρχαίου ἔθους διδασκαλείου τῶν ἱερῶν λόγων παρ’ αὐτοῖς συνεστῶτος·
 δ’ καὶ εἰς ἡμᾶς παρατείνεται καὶ πρὸς τῶν ἐν λόγῳ καὶ τῆ περὶ τὰ θεῖα σπουδῇ δυνατῶν συγκροτεῖσθαι παρειλήφαμεν, ἐν δὲ τοῖς μάλιστα κατ’ ἐκεῖνο καιροῦ διαλάμψαι λόγος ἔχει τὸν δεδηλωμένον, οἷα καὶ ἀπὸ φιλοσόφου ἀγωγῆς τῶν καλουμένων Στωϊκῶν ὡρμημένον.
 τοσαύτην δ’ οὖν φασιν αὐτὸν ἐκθυμοτάτῃ διαθέσει προθυμίαν περὶ τὸν θεῖον λόγον ἐνδείξασθαι, ὡς καὶ κήρυκα τοῦ κατὰ Νριστὸν εὐαγγελίου τοῖς ἐπ’ ἀνατολῆς ἔθνεσιν ἀναδειχθῆναι, μέχρι καὶ τῆς Ἰνδῶν στειλάμενον γῆς.
 ἦσαν γάρ, ἦσαν εἰς ἔτι τότε πλείους εὐαγγελισταὶ τοῦ λόγου, ἔνθεον ζῆλον ἀποστολικοῦ μιμήματος συνεισψέρειν ἐπ’ αὐξήσει καὶ οἰκοδομῇ τοῦ θείου λόγου προμηθούμενοι·
 ὧν εἷς γενόμενος καὶ ὁ Πάνταινος, καὶ εἰς Ἰνδοὺς ἐλθεῖν λέγεται, ἔνθα λόγος εὑρεῖν αὐτὸν προφθάσαν τὴν αὐτοῦ παροσίαν τὸ κατὰ Ματθαῖον εὐαγγέλιον παρά τισιν αὐτόθι τὸν Χριστὸν ἐπεγνωκόσιν, οἷς Βαρθολομαῖον τῶν ἀποστόλων ἕνα κηρῦξαι αὐτοῖς τε Ἑβραίων γράμμασι τὴν τοῦ Ματθαίου καταλεῖψαι γραφήν, ἢν καὶ σῴζεσθαι εἰς τὸν δηλούμενον χρόνον.
 ὅ γε μὴν Πάνταινος ἐπὶ πολλοῖς κατορθώμασι τοῦ κατ’’ Ἀλεξάνδρειαν τελευτῶν ἡγεῖται διδασκαλείου, ζώσῃ φωνῇ καὶ διὰ συγγραμμάτων τοὺς τῶν θείων δογμάτων θησαυροὺς ὑπομνηματιζόμενος.
 ΧΙ.
 Κατὰ τοῦτον ταῖς θείαις γραφαῖς συνασκούμενος ἐπ’ Ἀλεξανδρείας ἐγνωρίζετο Κλήμης, ὁμώνυμος τῷ πάλαι τῆς‘ Ρωμαίων ἐκκλησίαςX.
 Αt that timea man very famous for his learning named Pantaenus had charge of the lifeof the faithfulin Αlexandria,for from ancient custom a school of sacred learning eristed among them.
 This sehool has lasted on to our time, and we have heard that it is managed by men powerful in their learning and zeal for divine things, but tradition says that at that time Pantaenus was especially eminent, and that he had been influenced by the philosophic system of those called stoics.
 They say that he showed sueh Zeal in his warmdispositionfor the divine word that he was appointed as a herald for the goSpel of Christ to the heathen in the East, and was sent as faras India.
 For indeed there Were until then many evangelists of the word who had forethought to use inspired zeal on the apostolic model for the increases and the building upofthe divine word.
 Οne of these was Pantaenus, and itis said that he wenttothe Indians,and the tradition is that he found there that among some of those there who had known Christ the Gospel according to MattheW had preceded his coming;
 for Bartholomew, one ofthe apostles,had preached to them and had left them the writing of Matthew in Hebrew letters, which was preserved until the time mentioned.
 Pantaenus, after many achievementS, was at the head of the sehool in Alexandria until his death, and orally and in writing expounded the treasures of the divine doctrine.
 XI.
 Ιn his time Clement.
 the namesake of the pupil of the apostles who had once ruled the ehurch οf Rome, was famousin Αlexandria for his study ἡγησαμένῳ φοιτητῇ τῶν ἀποστόλων·
 ὃς δὴ καὶ ὀνομαστὶ ἐν αἷς συνέταξεν‘ Υποτυπώσεσιν ὡς διδασκάλου τοῦ Πανταίνου μέμνηται, τοῦτόν τε αὐτὸν καὶ τῶν Στρωματέων ἐν πρώτῳ συγγράμματι αἰνίττεσθαί μοι δοκεῖ, ὅτε τοὺς ἐμφανεστέρους ἧς κατείληφεν ἀποστολικῆς διαδοχῆς ἐπισημηνά- μενος ταῦτά φησιν·
“ ἤδη δὲ οὐ γραφὴ εἰς ἐπίδειξιν τετεχνασμένη ἥδε ἡ πραγματεία, ἀλλά μοι ὕπο.
 εἰς γῆρας θησαυρίζεται, λήθης φάρμακον, εἴδωλον ἀτεχνῶς καὶ σκιαγραφία τῶν ἐναργῶν καὶ ἐμψύχων ἐκείνων ὧν κατηξιώθην ἐπακοῦσαι λόγων τε καὶ ἀνδρῶν μακαρίων καὶ τῷ ὄντι ἀξιολόγων.
 τούτων ὁ μὲν ἐπὶ τῆς Ἑλλάδος, ὁ Ἰωνικός, ὁ δὲ ἐπὶ τῆς μεγάλης Ἑλλάδος, τῆς Κοίλης ἅτερος αὐτῶν Συρίας ἦν, ὁ δὲ ἀπ’ Αἰγύπτου, ἄλλοι δὲ ἀνὰ τὴν ἀνατολήν, καὶ ταύτης ὁ μέν τις τῶν Ἀσσυρίων, ὁ δὲ ἐν τῆ Παλαιστίνῃ Ἑβραῖος ἀνέκαθεν·
 ὑστάτῳ δὲ περιτυχών, δυνάμει δὲ ἄρα πρῶτος ἦν, άνεπαυσάμην, ἐν Αἰγύπτῳ θηράσας λεληθότα.
 ἀλλ’ οἱ μὲν τὴν ἀληθῆ τῆς μακαρίας σῴζοντες διδασκαλίας παράδοσιν εὐθὺς ἀπὸ Πέτρου καὶ Ἰακώβου Ἰωάννου τε καὶ Παύλου τῶν ἁγίων ἀποστόλων παῖς παρὰ πατρὸς ἐκδεξάμενος ὀλίγοι δὲ οἱ πατράσιν ὅμοιοι), ἧκον δὴ σὺν θεῷ καὶ εἰς ἡμᾶς, τὰ προγονικὰ ἐκεῖνα καὶ ἀποστολικὰ καταθησόμενοι απέρματα.
” XII.
 Ἐπὶ τούτων τῆς ἐν Ἱεροσολύμοις ἐκκλησίας ἐπίσκοπος ὁ παρὰ πολλοῖς εἰς ἔτι νῦν βεβοημένος Νάρκισσος ἐγνωρίζετο, πέντε πεντεκαιδεκάτην ἄγων διαδοχὴν ἀπὸ τῆς τῶν Ἰουδαίων κατὰ Ἀδριανὸν πολιορκίας, ἐξ οὗ δὴ πρῶτον τὴν αὐτόθι ἐκκλησίαν ἐξ ἐθνῶν συστῆναι μετὰ τοὺς of the Ηoly Scriptures with Ρantaenus.
 Ιn the Hypotyposes which he composed he mentioned Pantaenus by name as his teacher, and he seems to me to allude to him in the first bookof the Stromateis, 1 when he speaks thusin reference to the more distinguishedd members of the apostolic sueeession which he had received.
“ This work is nota writing composed for show, but notes stored up for my old age,a remedy against forgetfulness, an image without art, and a sketch of those clear and rital words which was privileged to hear, and οf blessed and truly notable men.
 of these one, the Ionian, was in Greece, another in South Italy,a thirdin CoeleSyria,2 another from Egypt, and there were others in the Εast, οne οftheman Assyrian, another in Palestine of Hebrew origin.
 But whenI had metthe last, and in power he was indeed the first, hunted him out from his concealment in Egypt and found rest.
 But these men preserved the true tradition of the blessedteachingdirectly from Ρeter and James and Johnand Ρaul,the holy apostles, son receiving it from father( but there werefewlike their fathers), and by the blessing of God they came down to us to deposit those ancestral and apostolic seeds.
” XII.
 In their timethere flourished Narcissus, bishop of the church at Jerusalem, who is still widely famous.
 Ηe held the succession in the fifteenth place after the siege of the Jews under Ηadrian, aud we have stated already that from that time the church in that city was composed οf Gentiles, in ἐκ περιτομῆς καθηγήσασθαί τε αὐτῶν πρῶτον ἐξ ἐθνῶν ἐπίσκοπον Μάρκον ἐδηλώσαμεν·
 μεθ’ ὅν ἐπισκοπεῦσαι Κασσιανὸν αἱ τῶν αὐτόθι διαδοχαὶ περιέχουσιν, καὶ μετὰ τοῦτον Πούπλιον, εἶτα Μάξιμον, καὶ ἐπὶ τούτοις Ἰουλιανόν, ἔπειτα Γάϊον, μεθ’ ὅν Σύμμαχον, καὶ Γάϊον ἕτερον, καὶ πάλιν ἄλλον Ἰουλιανόν, Καπίτωνά τε πρὸς τούτοις καὶ Οὐάλεντα καὶ Δολιχιανόν, καὶ ἐπὶ πᾶσι τὸν Νάρκισσον, τριακοστὸν ἀπὸ τῶν ἀποστόλων κατὰ τὴν τῶν ἑξῆς διαδοχὴν γεγενημένον.
 XIII.
 Ἐν τούτῳ καὶ Ῥόδων, γένος τῶν ἀπὸ(??) Ἀσίας, μαθητευθεὶς ἐπὶ Ῥώμης, ὡς αὐτὸς ἱστορεῖ, Τατιανῷ, ὃν ἐκ τῶν πρόσθεν ἔγνωμεν, διάφορα συντάξας βιβλία, μετὰ τῶν λοιπῶν καὶ πρὸς τὴν Μαρκίωνος παρατέτακται αἵρεσιν·
 ἢν καὶ εἰς διαφόρους γνώμας κατ’ αὐτὸν διαστᾶσαν ἱστορεῖ, τοὺς τὴν διάστασιν ἐμπεποιηκότας ἀναγράφων ἐπ’ ἀκριβές τε τὰς παρ’ ἑκάστῳ τούτων ἐπινενοημένας διελέγχων ψευδολογίας.
 ἄκουε δ’ οὗν καὶ αὐτοῦ ταῦτα γράφοντος·
 “ διὰ τοῦτο καὶ παρ’ ἑαυτοῖς ἀσύμφωνοι γεγόνασιν, ἀσυστάτου γνώμης ἀντιποιούμενοι.
 ἀπὸ γὰρ τῆς τούτων ἀγέλης Ἀπελλῆς μέν, ὁ τὴν πολιτείαν αεμνυνόμενος καὶ τὸ γῆρας, μίαν ἀρχὴν ὁμολογεῖ, τὰς δὲ προφητείας ἐξ ἀντικειμένου λέγει πνεύματος, πειθόμενος ἀποφθέγμασι παρθένου δαιμονώσης, ὄνομα Φιλουμένης·
 ἕτεροι δέ, καθὼς καὶ αὐτὸς ὁ ναύτης Μαρκίων, δύο ἀρχὰς εἰσηγοῦνται·
 ἀφ’ ὧν εἰσιν Ποτῖτός τε καὶ Βασιλικός.
 καὶ οὗτοι μὲν κατακολουθήσαντες τῷ Ποντικῷ λύκῳ καὶ μὴ εὑρίσκοντες τὴν διαίρεσιν succession to the Jewish Christians, and that the firstοfthe Gentile bishops was Marcus.
 Αfter him the.
 local successions record that Cassian was bishop, and afterhim Publius,then Maximus,in addition to them Julian, then Gaius, after him Symmachus and Gaius the second, and then another Julian, and Capito, and in addition to them Valens and dolichianus, and after them all Νarcissus, the thirtiethfrom the apostles according to the regular succession.
 1 XIII.
 Αt this time too Rhodo,of Asiatic race, was, as he narrates himself, the pupil at Rome of Tatian, whom we have mentioned above, and composed various books, among others especially one direeted against the heresy of Marcion.
 Ηe says thatit was dividedinhis time into various opinions, and, describing accurately those who had caused the divergence, he refutes the fahe teaching devised by each οf them.
 Listen then to him when he writes thus:
“ Therefore they have ceased to agree among themselves, maintaining inconsistent opinions.
 One of their herd is Αpelles, who is reverenced for his life and old age.
 Ηe admits that thereisone Principle,2 but says that the prophecies are of an opposing spirit, and he was persuaded by the utteranees of a possessed maiden named Philoumene.
 But οthers, such as the eaptain himself( Mareion), introduced two Principles.
 To them belong Ρotitus and Basilicus.
 These followed the wolf of Pontus, 3 not Perceiving τῶν πραγμάτων, ὡς οὐδ’ ἐκεῖνος, ἐπὶ τὴν εὐχέρειαν ἐτράποντο καὶ δύο ἀρχὰς ἀπεφήναντο φιλῶς καὶ ἀναποδείκτως·
 ἄλλοι δὲ πάλιν ἀπ’ αὐτῶν ἐπὶ τὸ χεῖρον ἐξοκείλαντες, οὐ μόνον δύο, ἀλλὰ καὶ τρεῖς ὑποτίθενται φύσεις·
 ὧν ἐστιν ἀρχηγὸς καὶ προστάτης καθὼς οἱ τὸ διδασκαλεῖον αὐτοῦ προβαλλόμενοι λέγουαιν.
 ” Γράφει δὲ ὁ αὐτὸς ὡς καὶ εἰς λόγους ἐληλύθει τῷ Ἀπελλῇ, φάσκων οὕτως·
 “ ὁ γὰρ γέρων Ἀπελλῆς αυμμίξας ἡμῖν, πολλὰ μὲν κακῶς λέγων ἠλέγχθη·
 ὅθεν καὶ ἔφασκεν μὴ δεῖν ὅλως ἐξετάζειν τὸν λόγον, ἀλλ’ ἕκαστον, ὡς πεπίστευκεν, δια- μένειν·
 σωθήσεσθαι γὰρ τοὺς ἐπὶ τὸν ἐσταυρωμένον ἠλπικότας ἀπεφαίνετο, μόνον ἐὰν ἐν ἔργοις ἀγαθοῖς εὐρίσκωνται·
 τὸ δὲ πάντων ἀσαφέστατον ἐδογματίζετο αὐτῷ πρᾶγμα, καθὼς προειρήκαμεν, τὸ περὶ θεοῦ.
 ἔλεγεν μὲν γὰρ μίαν ἀρχὴν καθὼς καὶ ὁ ἡμέτερος λόγoς.’
’ εἶτα προθεὶς αὐτοῦ πᾶσαν τὴν δόξαν, ἐπιφέρει φάσκων·
 “ λέγοντος δὲ πρὸς αὐτόνἴ’ πόθεν ἡ ἀπόδειξις αὕτη ἀοῖ, ἢ πῶς δύνασαι λέγειν μίαν ἀρχήν;
 φράσον ἡμῖν’ ἔφη τὰς μὲν προφητείας ἑαυτὰς ἐλέγχειν διὰ τὸ μηδὲν ὅλως ἀληθὲς εἰρηκέναι·
 ἀσύμφωνοι γὰρ ὑπάρχουσι καὶ ψευδεῖς καὶ ἑαυταῖς ἀντικείμεναι.
 τὸ δὲ πῶς ἐστιν μία ἀρχή, μὴ γινώσκειν ἔλεγεν, οὕτως δὲ κινεῖσθαι μόνον.
 εἶτ’ ἐπομοσαμένου μου τἀληθὲς εἰπεῖν, ὤμνυεν ἀληθεύων λέγειν μὴ ἐπίστασθαι πῶς εἷς ἐστιν ἀγένητος θεός, τοῦτο δὲ πιστεύειν.
 ἐγὼ δὲ γελάσας κατέγνων αὐτοῦ, διότι διδάσκαλος εἶναι λέγων, οὐκ ᾔδει τὸ διδασκόμενον ὑπ’ αὐτοῦ κρατύνειν.’
’ Ἐν τῷ αὐτῷ δὲ συγγράμματι Καλλιστίωνι thedivisionof things,any more thanhe, and turning toa simple solution, announced two principles, baldly and without proof.
 Others again, passing into worse error, supposed that there are not only two but even three Natures.
 of them the chief and leader is syneros, as those state who represent his school.
” The same writerd( Rhodo) says that he conversed with Αpelles, and states it thus:
“ For theοldman Apelles whenheconsorted with us, was proved to make many false statements.
 Hence also he used to say that itisnot necessary to investigatethe argument fully, but that eaeh should remain in his own belief, for he asserted that those who placed their hope on the Crucffied would be saved, if they persisted in good works.
 But as we have srid before, the most obseure part of all the doctrines which he put forward were about God.
 For he kept on saying that there is only one Principle just as our doctrine” Then after expounding all his opinions he goes on as follows:
“ Αnd whenI said tohim, where is this proof of yours, οr how can you say that there is οne Ρrinciple? Tell’he said thattheprophecies refute themselvesby not having spoken the truth at all, for they are inconsistent and false and contradict themselves, but as to how there is one Ρrinciple he said that he did not know it, but merely inclined to that riew.
 Then when adjured him to to speak the truth he swore that he was speakingthe truth, when he said that he did not know how the unbegotten God is one but that he believed it.
 ButI laughed athimand condemned him, because though he called himselfa teacher he did not know how to establish what he taught.
” In the samework, speaking to Kallistio, the same προσφωνῶν ὁ αὐτὸς μεμαθητεῦσθαι ἐπὶ Ῥώμης Τατιανῷ ἑαυτὸν ὁμολογεῖ·
 φησὶν δὲ καὶ ἐσπουδάσθαι τῷ Τατιανῷ ἐπικεκρυμμένον βιβλίον·
 δι’ ὧν τὸ ἀσαφὲς καὶ ἐπικεκρυμμένον τῶν θείων γραφῶν παραστήσειν ὑποσχομένου τοῦ Τατιανοῦ, αὐτὸς ὁ Ῥόδων ἐν ἰδίῳ συγγράμματι τὰς τῶν ἐκείνου προβλημάτων ἐπιλύσεις ἐκθήσεσθαι ἐπαγγέλλεται.
 φέρεται δὲ τοῦ αὐτοῦ καὶ εἰς τὴν ἑξαήμερον ὑπόμνημα.
 ὅ γέ τοι Ἀπελλῆς οὗτος μυρία κατὰ τοῦ Μωυσέως ἠσέβησεν νόμου, διὰ πλειόνων συγγραμμάτων τοὺς θείους βλασφημήσας λόγους εἰς ἔλεγχόν τε, ὥς γε δὴ ἐδόκει, καὶ ἀνατροπὴν αὐτῶν οὐ μικρὰν πεποιημένος σπουδήν.
 ταῦτα μὲν οὖν περὶ τούτων·
 XIV.
 μισόκαλός γε μὴν ἐς τὰ μάλιστα καὶ φιλοπόνηρος ὢν ὁ τῆς ἐκκλησίας τοῦ θεοῦ πολέμιος, μηδένα τε μηδαμῶς τῆς κατὰ τῶν ἀνθρώπων ἀπολιπὼν ἐπιβουλῆς τρόπον, αἱρέσεις ξένας αὖθις ἐπιφύεσθαι κατὰ τῆς ἐκκλησίας ἐνήργει·
 ὧν οἱ μὲν ἰοβόλων δίκην ἑρπετῶν ἐπὶ τῆς Ἀσίας καὶ Φρυγίας εἷρπον, τὸν μὲν δὴ παράκλητον Μοντανόν, τὰςδ’ ἐξ αὐτοῦ γυναῖκας, Πρίσκιλλαν καὶ Μαξίμιλλαν, ὡς ἂν τοῦ Μοντανοῦ προφήτιδας γεγονυίας, αὐχοῦντες·
 XV.
 οἱ δ’ ἐπὶ Ῥώμης ἤκμαζον, ὧν ἡγεῖτο Φλωρῖνος, πρεαβυτερίου τῆς ἐκκλησίας ἀποπεσών, Βλάστος τε σὺν τούτῳ, παραπλησίῳ πτώματι κατεσχημένος·
 οἳ καὶ πλείους τῆς ἐκ·
 περιέλκοντες ἐπὶ τὸ ἁφῶν ὑπῆγον βούλημα, θάτερος ἰδίως περὶ τὴν ἀλήθειαν νεωτερίξειν πειρώμενος.
 XVI.
 Πρὸς μὲν οὖν τὴν λεγομένην κατὰ Φρύγας αἵρεσιν ὅπλον ἰσχυρὸν καὶ ἀκαταγώνιστον ἐπὶ τῆς writer states that he had been himselfa disciple of Tatian at Rome, and he says that Tatian had preapred a book on Ρroblems, in whichhe undertook to setout what was unclearand hidden inthedivine seriptures, and Rhodo himself in his own work announces that he will set out the answers to Tatian's Problems.
 There is also extanta treatise of Rhodo on the ëmeron.
1 Αpelles, however, uttered countless impieties against the law of Moses, and in many treatises blasphemed the divine words with no little zeal, as it seemed, for theirrefutation and overthrow, as he at least thought.
 So much then concerning these.
 XIV.
 The enemy of the church οf God, who hates good and loves deeply all thatis wicked, left untried no kindof plot against men and again strove to raise up strange heresies against the church.
 Οf these some like poisonous reptiles crawled over Asia and Pyrygia, and boasted that Montanuswasthe Paraclete and that the womenοf his sect,Priscilla and Maximilla, were the prophetesses of Montanus.
 XV.
 Others flourished in Rome of which Florinus was the leader.
 Ηe had been turned out of the presbyteryof the churchandwith him was Blastuswho had suffereda similar fall.
 These drew away more οf the church and brought them to theirown opinion, each trying to introduce innovations about the truth in his own way.
 XVI.
 Αgainst the so- called Cataphrygian 2 heresy the power which champions the truth raised up a powertul and invincible weapon at Hierapolis in Ἱεραπόλεως τὸν Ἀπολινάριον, οὗ καὶ πρόσθεν μνήμην ὁ λόγος πεποίητο, ἄλλους τε σὺν αὐτῷ πλείους τῶν τηνικάδε λογίων ἀνδρῶν ἡ τῆς ἀληθείας ὑπέρμαχος ἀνίστη δύναμις, ἐξ ὧν καὶ ἡμῖν ἱστορίας πλείστη τις ὑπόθεσις καταλέλειπται.
 ἀρχόμενος γοῦν τῆς κατ’ αὐτῶν γραφῆς, τῶν εἰρημένων δή τις πρῶτον ἐπισημαίνεται ὡς καὶ ἀγράφοις τοῖς κατ’ αὐτῶν ἐπεξέλθοι ἐλέγχοις·
 προοιμιάζεται γοῦν τοῦτον τὸν τρόπον·
 “ ἐκ πλείστου ὅσου καὶ ἱκανωτάτου χρόνου, ἀγαπητὲ Ἀυίρκιε Μάρκελλε, ἐπιταχθεὶς ὑπὸ σοῦ συγγράψαι τινὰ λόγον εἰς τὴν τῶν κατὰ Μιλτιάδην λεγομένων αἵρεσιν, ἐφεκτικώτερόν πως μέχρι νῦν διεκείμην, οὐκ ἀπορίᾳ τοῦ δύνασθαι ἐλέγχειν μὲν τὸ ψεῦδος, μαρτυρεῖν δὲ τῆ ἀληθείᾳ, δεδιὼς δὲ καὶ ἐξευλαβούμενος μή πῃ δόξω τισὶν ἐπισυγγράφειν ἢ ἐπιδιατάσσεσθαι τῷ τῆς τοῦ εὐαγγελίου καινῆς διαθήκης λόγῳ, ᾧ μήτε προσθεῖναι μήτε ἀφελεῖν δυνατὸν τῷ κατὰ τὸ εὐαγγέλιον αὐτὸ πολιτεύεσθαι προῃρημένῳ.
 προσφάτως δὲ γενόμενος ἐν Ἀγκύρᾳ τῆς Γαλατίας καὶ καταλαβὼν τὴν κατὰ τόπον ἐκκλησίαν ὑπὸ τῆς νέας ταύτης, οὐχ, ὡς αὐτοί φασιν, προφητείας, πολὺ δὲ μᾶλλον, ὡς δεοχθήσεται, ψευδοπροφητείας διατεθρυλημένην, καθ’ ὅσον δυνατόν, τοῦ κυρίου προτεινομένων περὶ αὐτῶν τε τούτων καὶ τῶν προτεινομένων ὑπ’ αὐτῶν ἕκαστά τε διελέχθημεν ἡμέραις πλείοσιν ἐν τῇ ἐκκλησίᾳ, ὡς τὴν μὲν ἐκκλησίαν ἀγαλλιαθῆναι καὶ πρὸς τὴν ἀλήθειαν ἐπιρρωσθῆναι, τοὺςδ’ ἐξ ἐναντίας πρὸς τὸ παρὸν ἀποκρουσθῆναι καὶ τοὺς ἀντιθέτους λυπηθῆναι.
 ἀξιούντων οὗν τῶν κατὰ τόπον πρεσβυτέρων ὅπως τῶν λεχθέντων κατὰ τῶν ἀντιδιατιθεμένων μένων τῷ τῆς Apolinarius, who has already been mentioned in this work, and with him many others of the learned men οf that time, from whom abundant material for history has been left to us.
 One of these at the beginning of his treatise agrinstthe Montanists indicates that he had also taken part in oral controversy against them.
 Ηe writersa preface in this way:
“ For a long and protracted time, my dear Αbercius Mareellus, have been urged by you to compose a treatise against the sect of those called after Miltiades, 1 but until now 1 was somewhat reluctant, not from any lack of ability to refute the lie and testify to the truth, but from timidity and seruples lest 1 might seem to some to be adding to the writings or injunctions οf the word of the new covenant οf the gospel, to which no οne who has chosen to live according to the gospel itself can add and from which he cannot take away.
 But whenI had just come to Ancyra in Galatia and perceived that the chureh in that place was torn in two by this new movement which is not, as they call it, prophecy but much rather, as will be shown, false prophecy,I disputed concerning these people themselves and their propositions so far asI could, with the Lord's help,for many days continuously2 in the church.
 Thus the church rejoiced and was strengthened inthe truth,but our opponents were crushed for the moment and our adversaries were ffirtressed.
 Therefore the presbyters οf the place asked me to leave some note of what had been said against the opponents of the ἀληθείας λόγῳ ὑπόμνημά τι καταλείπωμεν, παρόντος καὶ τοῦ συμπρεσβυτέρου ἡμῶν Ζωτικοῦ τοῦ Ὀτρηνοῦ, τοῦτο μὲν οὐκ ἐπράξαμεν, ἐπηγγειλάμεθα δέ, ἐνθάδε γράφαντες, τοῦ κυρίου διδόντος, διὰ σπουδῆς πέμψειν αὐτοῖς” Ταῦτα καὶ ἑξῆς τούτοις ἕτερα κατ’ ἀρχὰς εἰπὼν τοῦ λόγου, τὸν αἴτιον τῆς δηλουμένης αἱρέσεως προιὼν τοῦτον ἀνιστορεῖ τὸν τρόπον·
“ ἡ τοίνυν ἐνστασις αὐτῶν καὶ πρόσφατος τοῦ ἀποσχίσματος αἵρεσις πρὸς τὴν ἐκκλησίαν τὴν αἰτίαν ἔσχε τοιαύτην.
 κώμη τις εἶναι λέγεται ἐν τῇ κατὰ τὴν Φρυγίαν Μυσίᾳ, καλουμένη Ἀρδαβαῦ τοὔνομα·
 ἔνθα φασί τινα τῶν νεοπίστων πρώτως, Μοντανὸν τοὔνομα, κατὰ Γρᾶτον Ἀσίας ἀνθύπατον, ἐν ἐπιθυμίᾳ Ψυχῆς ἀμέτρῳ φιλοπρωτείας δόντα πάροδον εἰς ἑαυτὸν τῷ ἀντικειμένῳ πνευματοφορηθῆναί τε καὶ αἰφνιδίως ἐν κατοχῇ τινι καὶ παρεκστάσει γενόμενον ἐνθουσιᾶν ἄρξασθαί τε λαλεῖν καὶ ξενοφωνεῖν, παρὰ τὸ κατὰ παράδοσιν καὶ κατὰ διαδοχὴν ἄνωθεν τῆς ἐκκλησίας ἔθος δῆθεν προφητεύοντα.
 δὲ κατ’ ἐκεῖνο καιροῦ ἐν τῇ τῶν νόθων ἐνεργουμένῳ ἀκροάσει γενομένων οἱ μὲν ὡς ἐπὶ ἐνεργουμένῳ καὶ δαιμονῶντι καὶ ἐν πλάνης πνεύματι ὑπάρχοντι καὶ τοὺς ὄχλους ταράττοντι ἀχθόμενοι, ἐπετίμων καὶ λαλεῖν ἐκώλυον, με·
 μνημένοι τῆς τοῦ κυρίου διαστολῆς τε καὶ ἀπειλῆς πρὸς τὸ φυλάττεσθαι τὴν τῶν ψευδοπροφητῶν ἐγρηγορότως παρουσίαν·
 οἱ δὲ ὡς ἁγίῳ πνεύματι καὶ προφητικῷ χαρίσματι ἐπαιρόμενοι καὶ οὐχ ἥκιστα χαυνούμενοι καὶ τῆς διαστολῆς τοῦ κυρίου ἐπιλανθανόμενοι, τὸ βλαψίφρον καὶ ὑποκοριστικὸν καὶ λαοπλάνον πνεῦμα προυκαλοῦντο, θελγόμενοι wordofthe truth,when Zoticus of Otrous, our fellow presbyter, was also present.
 Though we didnot do so, we promised to write from home if the Lord permitted, and to send it to them speedily.
” Continuing with other similar remarks at the beginningof his treatise, he proceeds to narrate as follows the cause of the heresy rererred to:
 —“ Their opposition and their recent heretical schism from the church had the following origin.
 In Phrygian Μysia there is said to bea Village called Ardabav.
 There they say thata recent convert called Montanus, when Gratus wasproconsulof Asia, in the unbounded lust of his sould for leadership gave access tp himself to the adversary, became obsessed, and suddenly fell into frenzy and convulsions.
 He began to be ecstatic and to speak andto talk strangely, prophesying contrary to the custom which belongs to the tradition and succession of the church from the beginning.
 Οf those who at that timeheard these bastard utterances some were vexed, thinking thathewas possessed bya devil and byaspirit of error, and was disturbing the populace;
 they rebuked him, and forbadehim to speak, remembering the distinction made by the Lord, and his warning to keep watchful guard against the coming οf the false prophets;
 but others, as though elevated by a holy spirit anda prophetic gift, and nota little conceited, forgot the Lord's distinction,and encouraged the mind- injuring and seducing and people- misleading καὶ πλανώμενοι ὑπ’ αὐτοῦ, εἰς τὸ μηκέτι κωλύεσθαι σιωπᾶν.
 τέχνη δέ τινι, μᾶλλον δὲ τοιαύτη μεθόδῳ(??) κακοτεχνίας ὁ διάβολος τὴν κατὰ τῶν παρηκόων ἀπώλειαν μηχανησάμενος καὶ παρ’ ἀξίαν ὑπ’ αὐτῶν τιμώμενος ὑπεξήγειρέν τε καὶ προσεξέκαυσεν αὐτῶν τὴν ἀποκεκοιμημένην ἀπὸ τῆς κατ’ ἀλήθειαν πίστεως διάνοιαν, ὡς καὶ ἑτέρας τινὰς δύο γυναῖκας ἐπεγεῖραι καὶ τοῦ νόθου πνεύματος πληρῶσαι, ὡς καὶ λαλεῖν ἐκφρόνως καὶ ἀκαίρως καὶ ἀλλοτριοτρόπως, ὁμοίως τῷ προειρημένῳ.
 καὶ τοὺς μὲν χαίροντας καὶ χαυνουμένους ἐπ’ αὐτῷ μακαρίζοντος τοῦ πνεύματος καὶ διὰ τοῦ μεγέθους τῶν ἐπαυγελμάτων ἔσθ’ ὅπῃ δὲ καὶ κατακρίνοντος στοχαστικῶς καὶ ἀξιοπίστως αὐτοὺς ἄντικρυς, ἵνα καὶ ἐλεγκτικὸν εἶναι δοκῇ ὀλίγοι δ’ ἦσαν οὗτοι τῶν Φρύγων ἐξηπατημένοι), τὴν δὲ καθόλου καὶ πᾶσαν τὴν ὑπὸ τὸν οὐρανὸν ἐκκλησίαν βλασφημεῖν διδάσκοντος τοῦ ἀπηυθαδισμένου πνεύματος, ὅτι μήτε τιμὴν μήτε πάροδον εἰς αὐτὴν τὸ ψευδοπροφητικὸν ἐλάμβανε πνεῦμα, τῶν γὰρ κατὰ τὴν Ἀσίαν πιστῶν πολλάκις καὶ πολλαχῇ τῆς Ἀσίας εἰς τοῦτο συνελθόντων καὶ τοὺς προσφάτους λόγους ἐξετασάντων καὶ βεβήλους ἀποφηνάντων καὶ ἀποδοκιμασάντων τὴν αἵρεσιν, οὕτω δὴ τῆς τε ἐκκλησίας ἐξεώσθησαν καὶ τῆς κοινωνίας εἴρχθησαν.
” Ταῦτα ἐν πρώτοις ἱστορήσας καὶ δι’ ὅλου τοῦ συγγράμματος τὸν ἔλεγχον τῆς κατ’ αὐτοὺς πλάνης ἐπαγαγών, ἐν τῷ δευτέρῳ περὶ τῆς τελευτῆς spirit, being cheatedand deceived byit so that he couldnotbe kept silent.
 1 But by some art, or rather by such an evil scheme of artifice, the deVil wrought destruction for the disobedient, and receiving unworthy honours from them stimuhrted and inflamed their understanding which was already dead to the true faith;
 so that he raised up two more women and filled them with the bastard spirit so that they spoke madly and improperly and strangely, like Montanus.
 The spirit 2 gave blesrings to those who rejoiced and were pround in him, and puffed them up by the greatness of its promises.
 Yet sometimes it flatly condemned them completely, wisely, and faithfully, that it might seem to be critical, though butfew of the Phrygians were deceived.
 But when the arrogant spirit taught to blaspheme the whole Catholic church throughout the world, because the spirit of false prophecy received from it neither honournor entrance,for the Christiansof Asia after assembling for this purpose many times and in many partsof the province, tested the recent utterances, pronounced them profane, and rejected the heresy,— then at lastthe Montanists were driven out of the chureh and excommunicated.
” Ηe tells this storyat the beginning, and throughoutthebook continues the refutationof the error, but inthe second book he speaksas follows about the τῶν προδεδηλωμένων ταῦτά φηαιν·
 “ ἐπειδὴ τοίνυνl καὶ προφητοφόντας ἡμᾶς ἀπεκάλουν, ὅτι μὴ τοὺς ἀμετροφώνους αὐτῶν προφήτας ἐδεξάμεθα( τού·
 τοὺς γὰρ εἶναί φααιν οὕσπερ ἐπηγγείλατο τῷ λαῷ πέμφειν ὁ κύριος), ἀποκρινάαθωααν ἡμῖν πρὸς θεοῦ·
 ἔστιν τις,ὧ βέλτιστοι, τούτων τῶν ἀπὸ Μοντανοῦ καὶ τῶν γυναικῶν λαλεῖν ἀρξαμένων ὅστις ὑπὸ Ἰουδαίων ἐδιώχθη ἢ ὑπὸ παρανόμων ἀπεκτάνθη;
 οὐδείς.
 οὐδέ γέ τις αὐτῶν κρατηθεὶς ὑπὲρ τοῦ ὀνόματος ἀνεαταυρώθη;
 οὐ γὰρ οὗν.
 οὐδὲ μὴν οὐδὲ ἐν συναγωγαῖς Ἰουδαίων τῶν γυναικῶν τις ἐμαστιγώθη ποτὲ ἢ ἐλιθοβολήθη;
 οὐδαμόαε οὐδαμῶς, ἄλλῳ δὲ θανάτῳ τελευτῆσαι, λέγονται Μοντανός τε καὶ Μαξίμιλλα.
 τούτους γὰρ ὑπὸ πνεύματος βλαφίφρονος ἑκατέρους ὑπο- κινήσαντος λόγος ἀναρτῆσαι ἑαυτοὺς οὐχ ὁμοῦ, κατὰ δὲ τὸν τῆς ἑκάστου τελευτῆς καιρὸν φήμη πολλὴ καὶ οὕτω δὲ τελευτῆσαι καὶ τὸν βίον κατα- ατρέφαι Ἰούδα προδότου δίκην, καθάπερ καὶ τὸν θαυμαστὸν ἐκεῖνον τὸν πρῶτον τῆς κατ’ αὐτοὺς λεγομένης προφητείας οἷον ἐπίτροπόν τινα Θεό- δοτον πολὺς αἱρεῖ λόγος ὡς αἰρόμενόν ποτε καὶ ἀναλαμβανόμενον εἰς οὐρανοὺς παρεκατῆναί τε καὶ καταπιατεῦααι ἑαυτὸν τῷ τῆς ἀπάτης πνεύματι καὶ δισκευθέντα κακῶς τελευτῆσαι·
 φααὶ γοῦν τοῦτο οὕτως γεγονέναι.
 ἀλλὰ μὴ ἄνευ τοῦ ἰδεῖν ἡμᾶς ἐπίατααθαί τι τῶν τοιούτων νομίζωμεν,ὧ μακάριε·
 ἴσως μὲν γὰρ οὕτως, ἴσως δὲ οὐχ οὕτως τετελευτήκασιν Μοντανός τε καὶ Θεόδοτος καὶ ἡ προειρημένη γυνή.
” Αὖθις δ’ ἐν τῷ αὐτῷ φησιν λόγῳ τοὺς τότε ἱεροὺς ἐπισκόπους πεπειρᾶσθαι μὲν τὸ ἐν end οf the persons referred to:
“ Since then they called us murderers οfthe prophets becausewe did not receivetheir chattering prophets( for theysay that thesearethose whom the Lordpromised to sendtothe people), let them answer us before God.
 Is there anyone, good people, of those whose talking began with Montanus and the women, who was persecuted by Jews οr killed by the wicked? Νot one.
 Or was there any οne of them who was taken and crucified for the name? Νo, there was not.
 Or was any οneof the women everscourgedin the synagoguesof the Jews orstoned? Νever anywhere.
 It was a different death that Μontanusand Maximilla are said to have died;
 for the story goes that each οf them was inspired by a mind- destroying spirit to commit suicide, though not together, and there was much gossip at the time of the death οf eaeh.
 But thus it was that they died, and destroyed their lives like the traitor Judas.
 So also general report says thata certriaIn Theodotus, that remarkable man, the first steward as it were oftheir alleged prophecy, was sometimes taken up and raisedto Heaven, when he fell intoa trance and trusted himself to the spiritof deceit, but was hurled down and died miserably.
 They say, at least, that thiS happened thus.
 But not having seen them ourselves we do notelaimto have any knowledgeof such things,my friend,for perhaps Montanus and Theodotus and the above mentioned woman died in this way, but perhaps they did not.
” Again in the same book he says that the sacred bishops of that timetried to refutethespirit that Μαξιμίλλῃ πνεῦμα διελέγξαι, κεκωλῦσθαι δὲ πρὸς ἑτέρων, συνεργούντων δηλαδὴ τῷ πνεύματι·
 γράφει δὲ οὕτως·
“ καὶ μὴ λεγέτω ἐν τῷ αὐτῷ λόγῳ τῷ κατὰ Ἀστέριον Ὀρβανὸν τὸ διὰ Μαξιμίλλης πνεῦμα διώκομαι ὡς λύκος ἐκ προβάτων·
 οὐκ εἰμὶ λύκος·
 ῥῆμά εἰμι καὶ πνεῦμα καὶ δύναμις,’ ἀλλὰ τὴν ἐν τῷ πνεύματι δύναμιν ἐναργῶς δειξάτω καὶ ἐλεγξάτω καὶ ἐξομολογεῖσθαι διὰ τοῦ πνεύματος καταναγκασάτω τοὺς τότε παρόντας εἰς τὸ δοκιμάσαι καὶ διαλεχθῆναι τῷ πνεύματι λαλοῦντι, ἄνδρας δοκίμους καὶ ἐπισκόπους, Ζωτικὸν ἀπὸ Κουμάνης κώμης καὶ Ἰουλιανὸν ἀπὸ Ἀπαμείας, ὧν οἱ περὶ Θεμίσωνα τὰ στόματα φιμώσαντες οὐκ εἴασαν τὸ ψευδὲς καὶ λαοπλάνον πνεῦμα ὑπ’ αὐτῶν ἐλεγχθῆναι.
” Ἐν ταὐτῷ δὲ πάλιν ἕτερα μεταξὺ πρὸς ἔλεγχον τῶν τῆς Μαξιμίλλης ψευδοπροφητειῶν εἰπών, ὁμοῦ τόν τε χρόνον καθ’ ὃν ταῦτ’ ἔγραφεν, σημαίνει καὶ τῶν προρήσεων αὐτῆς μέμνηται δι’ ὧν πολέμους ἔσεσθαι καὶ ἀκαταστασίας προεμαντεύσατο, ὧν καὶ τὴν ψευδολογίαν εὐθύνει, ὧδε λέγων·
“ καὶ πῶς οὐ καταφανὲς ἤδη γέγονεν καὶ τοῦτο τὸ ψεῦδος;
 πλείω γὰρ ἢ τρισκαίδεκα ἔτη εἰς ταύτην τὴν ἡμέραν ἐξ οὗ τετελεύτηκεν ἡ γυνή, καὶ οὔτε μερικὸς οὔτε καθολικὸς κόσμῳ γέγονεν πόλεμος, ἀλλὰ καὶ χριστιανοῖς μᾶλλον εἰρήνη διάμονος ἐξ ἐλέου θεοῦ.
” Καὶ ταῦτα δ’ ἐκ τοῦ δευτέρου συγγράμματος.
 καὶ ἀπὸ τοῦ τρίτου δὲ σμικρὰς παραθήσομαιwas in Maximilla, but were prevented by others who ainly co- operated with the spirit, and he writes us:
“ And letnotthe spirit which speaksthrough aximilla say,inthe same work accordingtosterius Orbanus,1 ‘Iam driven away likea wolf the sheep.
 1 am not a wolf,I am word and Ρiritand’ But lethimshow clearly and rovethepowerin the spirit, and let him through spirit force to recognize him those who were then resent for the purpose of testing and conversing with he spirit as it spoke,— eminentmenand bishops, ticus fromthe village Cumane, and Julian from Apamea, whose mouths the partyof Themiso muzzled, and didnot allow the false spirit which deceived the eople to be refuted by them.
” In the samebook, again, after οther refutations of the false prophecies of Maximilla, inasingle assage he both indicates the time at whieh he wrote this, and quotes her predictions, in whichshe foretold futurewarsand revolutions,and he correctsthe falsehood of themas follows:
“ Ηas itnotbeen made obrious already that thisis another lie? For it is more than thirteen years to- day sincethe woman died, and there has been in the world neither local nor universal war, but rather by the mercy οf God continuing peace even for ”2 This is from his second book.
 Αnd from the thirdI will also quotea few words in which hespeaks as λέξεις, δι’ ὧν πρὸς τοὺς αὐχοῦντας ὡς ἄρα πλείους καὶ αὐτῶν μεμαρτυρηκότες εἶεν, ταῦτά φησιν“ ὅταν τοίνυν ἐν πᾶσι τοῖς εἰρημένοις ἐλεγχθέντες ἀπορήσαι, ἐπὶ τοὺς μάρτυρας καταφεύγειν πει- ρῶνται, λέγοντες πολλοὺς ἔχειν μάρτυρας καὶ τοῦτ’ εἶναι τεκμήριον πιστὸν τῆς δυνάμεως τοῦ παρ’ αὐτοῖς λεγομένου προφητικοῦ πνεύματος.
 τὸ δ’ ἐστὶν ἄρα, ὡς ἔοικεν, παντὸς μᾶλλον οὐκ ἀληθές.
 καὶ γὰρ τῶν ἄλλων αἱρέσεών τινες πλείστους ὅσους ἔχουσι μάρτυρας, καὶ οὐ παρὰ τοῦτο δήπου συγκαταθησόμεθα, οὐδὲ ἀλήθειαν ἔχειν αὐτοὺς ὁμολογήσομεν.
 καὶ πρῶτοί γε οἱ ἀπὸ τῆς Μαρκίωνος αἱρέσεως Μαρκιανισταὶ κα.
 πΛείστους δάους ἔχειν Χριστοῦ μάρτυρας λέγουσιν, ἀλλὰ τόν γε χριστὸν αὐτὸν κατ’ ἀλήθειαν οὐχ ὁμολογοῦσιν.
” Καὶ μετὰ βραχέα τούτοις ἐπιφέρει λέγων·
“ ὅθεν τοι καὶ ἐπειδὰν οἱ ἐπὶ τὸ τῆς κατ’ ἀλήθειαν πίστεως μαρτύριον κληθέντες ἀπὸ τῆς ἐκκλησίας τύχωσι μετά τινων τῶν ἀπὸ τῆς τῶν Φρύγων αἱρέσεως λεγομένων μαρτύρων, διαφέρονταί τε πρὸς αὐτοὺς καὶ μὴ κοινωνήσαντες αὐτοῖς τελειοῦνται διὰ τὸ μὴ βούλεσθαι συγκαταθέσθαι τῷ διὰ Μοντανοῦ καὶ τῶν γυναικῶν πνεύματι.
 καὶ ὅτι τοῦτ’ ἀληθές, καὶ ἐπὶ τῶν ἡμετέρων χρόνων ἐν Ἀπαμείᾳ τῆ πρὸς Μαιάνδρῳ τυγχάνει γεγενημένον ἐν τοῖς περὶ Γάιον καὶ Ἀλέξανδρον ἀπὸ Εὐμενείας μαρτυρήσασι πρόδηλον.
” XVII.
 Ἐν τούτῳ δὲ τῷ συγγράμματι καἰ Μιλτιάδου συγγραφέως μέμνηται, ὡς λόγον τινὰ καὶ αὐτοῦ κατὰ τῆς προειρημένης αἱρέσεως γε·
 γραφότος·
 παραθέμενος γοῦν αὐτῶν λέξεις τινάς, follows against those who boasted that theyhadhad ̔̀tyrs.
“ so when theyhave been refutedin he whole discussionand have nothingto reply, they try to take refuge in martyrs, saying that they have many martyrs and that this isa trustworthy proofthe power ofthealleged prophetic spirit among them.
 But this appears to be actually further from the tmththan anything.
 For some of the οther heresies have innumerable martyrs, butΙdo not suppose thatwe shall accept them for that reason, nor admit that they have the truth.
 In the first Ρlace, indecd,the so- called Marcianists οf the heresy of Marcion say that they have innumerable martyrs to Christ but nevertheless Chrirt himself they do not confess accorffing to truth.
” Αnd aftera little he goes on as follows:
“ Wherefore whenever members of the church who have been called to martyrdom for the true faith meet any of the so- called martyrs of the Montanist heresy, they separate from them and die without communicating with them, because they refuse to agree with the spirit in Montanus and the women.
 Αnd that this is true, and thatithappened in our timein Αpamea on the Meander, is shownby the caseof those who were martyred with Gaius and Αlexander οf Εumeneia.
” XVII.
 Αnd in this work he also quotes Miltiades as a writer who had also himself writtena treatise against the heresy mentioned.
 Αfter quoting some ἐπιφέρει λέγων·
 “ ταῦτα εὑρὼν ἔν τινι συγγράμματι αὐτῶν ἐνισταμένων τῷ Ἀλκιβιάδου τοῦ ἀδελφοῦ συγγράμματι, ἐν ᾧ ἀποδείκνυσιν περὶ τοῦ μὴ δεῖν προφήτην ἐν ἐκστάσει λαλεῖν, ἐπετεμόμην.
 ” ὑποκαταβὰς δ’ ἐν ταὐτῷ τοὺς κατὰ τὴν καινὴν διαθήκην προπεφητευκότας καταλέγει, ἐν οἷς καταριθμεῖ Ἀμμίαν τινὰ καὶ Κοδρᾶτον, λέγων οὕτως·
“ ἀλλ’ ὅ γε ψευδοπροφήτης ἐν παρεκστάσει, ᾧ ἕπεται ἄδεια καὶ ἀφοβία, ἀρχομένου μὲν ἐξ ἑκουσίου ἀμαθίας, καταστρέφοντος δὲ εἰς ἀκούσιον μανίαν ψυχῆς, ὡς προείρηται.
 τοῦτον δὲ τὸν τρόπον οὔτε τινὰ τῶν κατὰ τὴν παλαιὰν οὔτε τῶν κατὰ τὴν καινὴν πνευματοφορηθέντα προφήτην δεῖξαι δυνή- δονται, οὔτε Ἄγαβον οὔτε Ἰούδαν οὔτε Σίλαν οὔτε τὰς Φιλίππου θυγατέρας, οὔτε τὴν ἐν Φιλαδελφίᾳ Ἀμμίαν οὔτε Κοδρᾶτον, οὔτε εἰ δή τινας ἄλλους μηδὲν αὐτοῖς προσήκοντας καυχήσονται’’ καὶ αὖθις δὲ μετὰ βραχέα ταῦτά φηαιν·
“ εἰ γὰρ μετὰ Κοδρᾶτον καὶ τὴν ἐν Φιλαδελφίᾳ Ἀμμίαν, ὥς φασιν, αἱ περὶ Μοντανὸν διεδέξαντο γυναῖκες τὸ προφητικὸν χάρισμα, τοὺς ἀπὸ Μοντανοῦ καὶ τῶν γυναικῶν τίνες παρ’ αὐτοῖς διεδέξαντο, δειξάτωσαν·
 δεῖν γὰρ εἶναι τὸ προφητικὸν χάρισμα ἐν πάσῃ τῆ ἐκκλησίᾳ μέχρι τῆς τελείας παρουσίας ὁ ἀπόστολος ἀξιοῖ.
 ἀλλ’ οὐκ ἂν ἔχοιεν δεῖξαι τεσσαρεσκαιδέκατον ἤδη που τοῦτο ἔτος ἀπὸ τῆς Μαξιμίλλης τελευτἠς.
 ” Οὗτος μὲν δὴ τοσαῦτα·
 ὅ γέ τοι πρὸς αὐτοῦ δεδηλωμένος Μιλτιάδης καὶ ἄλλας ἡμῖν τῆς ἰδίας περὶ τὰ θεῖα λόγια απουδῆς μνήμας καταλέλοιπεν of their sayings he continues as follwos:
 “I have given this abstract of whatΙ found ina work of theirs when they were attacking the work of Alcibiades 1 the Christian in which he shows that a prophet need not to speak in” And he goes on in the same work to give a catalogue of those who have been prophets of the New Testament, and among them he numbersa certain Ammia and Quadratus and says thus:
“ But the false prophetspeaksin ecstasy,after which follow ease and freedom from fear;
 he begins with voluntary ignorance, but turns to involuntary madness of soul, as has been said before.
 But they cannot show that any prophet, either of those in the Οld Testament or οf thoseinthe New,was inspired in this way;
 they can boast neither of Agabus, nor of Judas,nor of Silas, nor of the daughtersof Philip,nor ofAmmia in Philadelphia, nor of Quadratus, nor of any others Who do not belong to ” And again after a little he goes on,“ For if the Montanist women succeeded to Quadratus and Ammia in Philadelphia in the prophetic gift, let them show who among them suceeeded the followers of Montanus and the women, for the apostle grants thatthe prophetic gift shall be in all the church until the final coming, but this they could not show, seeing that this is already the fourteenth year from the death of Maximilla.
” Ηe, therefore, so writes.
 But the Miltiades mentioned by him has also left us other monumentsof his own zeal for the oracles of God in the treatises which ἔν τε οἷς πρὸς‘ ́Eλληνας συνέταξε λόγοις καὶ τοῖς πρὸς Ἰουδαίους, ἑκατέρᾳ ἰδίως ὑποθέσει ἐν δυσὶν ὑπαντήσας αυγγράμμασιν, ἔτι δὲ καὶ πρὸς τοὺς κοσμικοὺς ἄρχοντας ὑπὲρ ἦς μετῄει φιλοσοφίας πεποίηται ἀπολογίαν.
 XVIII.
 τῆς δὲ κατὰ Φρύγας καλουμένης αἱρέσεως καὶ Ἀπολλώνιος, ἐκκλησιαστικὸς συγγραφεύς, ἀκμαζούσης εἰς ἔτι τότε κατὰ τὴν Φρυγίαν ἔλεγχον ἐνστησάμενος, ἴδιον κατ’ αὐτῶν πεποίηται σύγγραμμα, τὰς μὲν φερομένας αὐτῶν προφητείας ψευδεῖς οὔσας κατὰ λέξιν εὐθύνων, τὸν δὲ βίον τῶν τῆς αἱρέσεως ἀρχηγῶν ὁποῖός τις γέγονεν, διελέγχων·
 αὐτοῖς δὲ ῥήμασιν περὶ τοῦ Μοντανοῦ ταῦτα λέγοντος ἄκουε·
“ ἀλλὰ τίς ἐστιν οὗτος ὁ πρόα·
 φατὸς διδάσκαΛος, τὰ ἔργα αὐτοῦ καὶ ἡ διδασκαλία δείκνυσιν.
 οὗτός ἐστιν ὁ διδάξας λύαεις γάμων, ὁ νηστείας νομοθετήσας, ὁ Πέπουζαν καὶ Τύμιον Ἱερουσαλὴμ ὀνομάσας πόλειςδ’ εἰσὶν αὗται μικραὶ τῆς Φρυγίας), τοὺς πανταχόθεν ἐκεῖ συναγαγεῖν ἐθέλων ὁπρακτῆρας χρημάτων καταστήσας, ὁ ἐπ’ ὀνόματι προσφορῶν τὴν δωροληψίαν ἐπιτεχνώμενος,, ὁ σαλάρια χορηγῶν τοῖς κηρύσσουσιν αὐτοῦ τὸν λόγον, ἵνα διὰ τῆς γαατριμαργίας ἡ διδασκαλία τοῦ λόγου κρατύνηται.
” Καὶ ταῦτα μὲν περὶ τοῦ Μοντανοῦ·
 καὶ περὶ τῶν προφητίδων δὲ αὐτοῦ ὑποκαταβὰς οὕτω γράφει·
 δείκνυμεν οὖν αὐτὰς πρώτας τὰς προφήτιδας ταύτας, ἀφ’ οὗ τοῦ πνεύματος ἐπληρώθησαν, τοὺς ἄνδρας καταλιπούσας.
 πῶς οὖν ἐψεύδοντο Πρίσκιλλαν παρθένον ἀποκαλοῦντες;
 εἶτ’ ἐπιφέρει λέγων·
 “ δοκεῖ ἀοῖ πᾶσα γραφὴ κωλύειν προφήτην λαμβάνειν δῶρα καὶ χρήματα;
 ὅταν οὖν ἴδω τὴν he composed against the Gentiles and against the Jews, treating eaeh subject separately in two treatises, and besides this he wrote an Apology to the secular rulerS on behalf of the Ρhilosophy which he held.
 XVIII.
 Apollonius also,a writer of the ehurch when the so- called Montanist heresy was still flourishing in Ρhrygia, composed a refutation and published it as a separate work against them, proving word by word that their alleged prophecies are false and showing the true character of the life of the leaders of the heresy.
 Listen to the actual words which he uses about Montanus.
“ But the deeds andthe teachings of this recent teaeher show his eharaeter.
 Ιt is he Who taught the annulment of marriage,who enacted fasts, who gave the name οf Jerusalem to Pepuza and Tymion, which are little towns in Phrygia, and wished to hold assemblies there from everywhere, who appointedcolleetors of money, who organimd the receiving of gifts under the name of offerings, who provided salaries for those who preached his doctrine in order that its teaching might prevail through gluttony.
” So he saysabout Montanus.
 Αnd a little further on he writes thus about the Ρrophetesses.
“ Thus we prove that these first prophetesses themselves deserted their husbands from the moment that they were filled with the spirit.
 what a lieit is thenforthem to call Ρriscillaa” Then he goeson saying:
“ Does not all Scripture seem to you to forbida prophet from receiving gifts and money7.
 There- προφῆτιν εἰληφυῖαν καὶ χρυσὸν καὶ ἄργυρον καὶ πολυτελεῖς ἐσθῆτας, πῶς αὐτὴν μὴ παραιτήαωμαι.
 ” Αὖθις δ᾿ ὑποκαταβὰς περί τινος τῶν κατ’ αὐτοὺς ὁμολογητῶν ταῦτά φησιν·
 “ ἔτι δὲ καὶ Θεμίσων, ὁ τὴν ἀξιόπιστον πλεονεξίαν ἠμφιεσμένος, ὁ μὴ βαστάσας τῆς ὁμολογίας τὸ σημεῖον, ἀλλὰ πλήθει χρημάτων ἀποθέμενος τὰ δεσμά, δέον ἐπὶ τούτῳ ταπεινοφρονεῖν, ὡς μάρτυς καυχώμενος, ἐτόλμησεν, μιμούμενος τὸν ἀπόστολον, καθολικήν τινα συνταξάμενος ἐπιστολῄν, κατηχεῖν μὲν τοὺς ἄμεινον αὐτοῦ πεπιστευκότας, συναγωνίζεσθαι δὲ τοῖς τῆς κενοφωνίας λόγοις, βλασφημῆσαι δὲ εἰς τὸν κύριον καὶ τοὺς ἀποστόλους καὶ τὴν ἁγίαν ἐκκληαίαν.
” καὶ περὶ ἑτέρου δὲ αὖθις τῶν κατ’ αὐτοὺς τετιμημένων ὡς δὴ μαρτύρων οὕτω γράφει·
 “ ἵνα δὲ μὴ περὶ πλειόνων λέγωμεν, ἡ προφῆτις ἡμῖν εἰπάτω τὰ κατὰ Ἀλέξανδρον, τὸν λέγοντα ἑαυτὸν μάρτυρα, ᾧ συνεστιᾶται, ᾧ προσκυνοῦσιν καὶ αὐτῷ πολλοί·
 οὗ τὰς λῃστείας καὶ τὰ ἄλλα τολμήματα ἐφ’ οἷς κεκόλασται, οὐχ ἡμᾶς δεῖ λέγειν, ἀλλὰ ὁ ὀπισθόδομος ἔχει.
 τίς οὖν τίνι χαρίζεται τὰ ἁμαρτήματα;
 πότερον ὁ προφήτης τὰς λῃστείας τῷ μάρτυρι ἢ ὁ μάρτυς τῷ προφήτη τὰς πλεονεξίας;
 εἰρηκότος γὰρ τοῦ κυρίου μὴ Μatt.
 10, 9.
 κτήσησθε χρυσὸν μήτε ἄργυρον μηδὲ δύο χιτῶνας, οὗτοι πᾶν τοὐναντίον πεπλημμελήκασιν περὶ τὰς τούτων τῶν ἀπηγορευμένων κτήσεις.
 δείξομεν γὰρ τοὺς λεγομένους παρ’ αὐτοῖς προφήτας καὶ fore WhenΙ see that the prophetess has received gold and silver and expensive clothes, how shouldI refrain from blaming her?” Then furtheron he says thisaboutone of their confessors:
“ Moreover, Themiso too, who was garbed with specious covertousness, who did not endure the sign of confession but exchanged prison for wealth when he ought to have been humble- minded on this accound, and boasted that he wasa martyr, dared,in imitationof the apostle, to composean epistle general, to instruct those whose faith was better than his, and to contend with empty sounding words and to blaspheme against the Lord and the apostles and the holy” Αnd again he writes thus about another of those who were honoured among them as martyrs:
“ But in order thatwe may not speakaboutmore of them,letthe prophetess 1 tell us the storyof Alexander, who callshimselfa martyr, with whom shejoinsin revels,to whom many pay reverence.
 We need not tell of his robberies and the other crimes for which he has been punished, but the record- house 2 has them.
 Which then forgives the’s sins? Does the prophet absolve the martyr of robbery or the martyr forgive the prophet for avarice? For the Lord said,‘ Provide neither gold nor silver nor two’;
 but these, doing wholly otherwise, have transgressed by the acquisition of these forbidden things.
 For we will show that their so- called prophets and martyrs make μάρτυρας μὴ μόνον παρὰ πλουσίων, ἀλλὰ καὶ παρὰ πτωχῶν καὶ ὀρφανῶν καὶ χηρῶν κερματιζομένους.
 καὶ εἰ πεποίθησιν ἔχουσιν, στήτωσαν ἐν τούτῳ καὶ διορισάσθωσαν ἐπὶ τούτοις, ἵνα ἐὰν ἐλεγχθῶσιν, κἂν τοῦ λοιποῦ παύσωνται πλημμελοῦντες.
 δεῖ γὰρ τοὺς καρποὺς δοκιμάζεσθαι τοῦ προφήτου·
 ἀπὸ γὰρ τοῦ καρποῦ τὸ ξύλον γινώσκεται.
 ἵνα δὲ τοῖς βουλομένοις τὰ κατὰ Ἀλέξανδρον ἦ γνώριμα, κέκριται ὑπὸ Αἰμιλίου Φροντίνου ἀνθυπάτου ἐν Ἐφέσῳ, οὐ διὰ τὸ ὄνομα, ἀλλὰ δι’ ἃς ἐτόλμησεν λῃστείας, ὢν ἤδη παραβάτης·
 εἶτ’ ἐπιψευσάμενος τῷ ὀνόματι τοῦ κυρίου, ἀπολέλυται, πλανήσας τοὺς ἐκεῖ πιστούς, καὶ ἡ ἰδία παροικία αὐτόν, ὅθεν ἢν, οὐκ ἐδέξατο διὰ τὸ εἶναι αὐτὸν λῃστήν, καὶ οἱ θέλοντες μαθεῖν τὰ κατ’ αὐτὸν ἔχουσιν τὸ τῆς Ἀσίας δημόσιον ἀρχεῖον·
 ὅν ὁ προφήτης συνόντα πολλοῖς ἔτεσιν ἀγνοεῖ.
 τοῦτον ἐλέγχοντες ἡμεῖς, δι’ αὐτοῦ καὶ τὴν ὑπόστασιν ἐξελέγχομεν τοῦ προφήτου.
 τὸ ὅμοιον ἐπὶ πολλῶν δυνάμεθα ἀποδεῖξαι, καὶ εἰ θαρροῦσιν, ὑπομεινάτωσαν τὸν ἔλεγχον.
” Πάλιν τε αὗ ἐν ἑτέρῳ τόπῳ τοῦ συγγράμματος περὶ ὧν αὐχοῦσι προφητῶν ἐπιλέγει ταῦτα·
“ ἐὰν ἀρνῶνται δῶρα τοὺς προφήτας αὐτῶν εἰληφέναι, τοῦθ’ ὁμολογησάτωσαν ὅτι ἐὰν ἐλεγχθῶσιν εἰλγφότες, οὐκ εἰσὶ προφῆται, καὶ μυρίας ἀποδείξεις τούτων παραστήσομεν.
 ἀναγκαῖον δέ ἐστιν πάντας καρποὺς δοκιμάζεσθαι προφήτου.
 προφήτης, εἰπέ μοι, βάπτεται;
 προφήτης στιβίζεται;
 προφήτης Φιλοκοσμεῖ;
 προφήτης τάβλαις καὶ κύβοις παίζει;
 προφήτης δανείζει;
 ταῦτα ὁμολογησάτωσαν πό- gain not οnly from the rich but from the poor and from orphans and widows.
 Αnd if they have the courage let them stop at this point and discuss these matters in order that if they are convicted they may at least cease transgressing for the future.
 For it is necessary to test the fruits of the prophet, for from the fruits the tree is known.
 But, that the storyof Alexander may be known tothosewho wish, he was convicted by Aemilius Pompinus, proconsul in Ephesus, not for beinga Christian butforhis daring robberies, and he was an old offender.
 Then, by falsely claiming the name of the Lordhe was released, having deceived the Christians there, and his own diocese from which he came would not receive him because he wasa robber,and those who wish to learn his story have the public records of Asia at their disposition.
 1 The prophet is ignorant about him though he lived with himfor many years, but we have exposed him, and through him expose also the nature of the prophet.
 we can ShoWthe same in manyinstances, and,if they dare, let themstand the test.
” And againin another partof the bookhesays this about their boasted prophets:
“ If they deny that their prophets have taken gifts let them admit this, that if they have been convicted, they arenot true prophets, and we will give countless proofsof this.
 But it is necessary to test all the fruits ofa prophet.
 Tell me, does a prophet dye his hair? Does he pencil his eyelids? Does he love ornaments? Does he gambleand dice? Does he lend money? Let them state τερον ἔξεστιν ἢ μή, ἐγὼ δ’ ὅτι γέγονεν παρ’ αὐτοῖς, δείξω.
 ” Ὁ δ’ αὐτὸς οὗτος Ἀπολλώνιος κατὰ τὸ αὐτὸ σύγγραμμα ἱατορεῖ ὡς ἄρα τεσσαρακοστὸν ἐτύγχανεν ἔτος ἐπὶ τὴν τοῦ αυγγράμματος αὐτοῦ γραφὴν ἐξ οὗ τῇ προσποιήτῳ αὐτοῦ προφητείᾳ ὁ Μοντανὸς ἐπικεχείρηκεν, καὶ πάλιν φησὶν ὡς ἄρα Ζωτικός, οὗ καὶ ὁ πρότερος συγγραφεὺς ἐμνημόνευσεν, ἐν Πεπούζοις προφητεύειν δὴ προσποιουμένης τῆς Μαξιμίλλης ἐπιστὰς διελέγξαι τὸ ἐνεργοῦν ἐν αὐτῇ πνεῦμα πεπείραται, ἐκωλύθη γε μὴν πρὸς τῶν τὰ ἐκείνης φρονούντων.
 καὶ Θρασέα δέ τινος τῶν τότε μαρτύρων μνημονεύει.
 ἔτι δὲ ὡς ἐκ παραδόσεως τὸν σωτῆρά φησιν προστεταχέναι τοῖς αὐτοῦ ἀποστόλοις ἐπὶ δώδεκα ἔτεσιν μὴ χωρισθῆναι τῆς ῾Ιερουσαλήμ, κέχρηται δὲ καὶ μαρτυρίαις ἀπὸ τῆς Ἰωάννου Ἀποκαλύψεως, καὶ νεκρὸν δὲ δυνάμει θείᾳ πρὸς αὐτοῦ Ἰωάννου ἐν τῆ’ Eφέαῳ ἐγηγέρθαι ἱατορεῖ, καὶ ἄλλα τινά φηαιν, δι’ ὧν ἱκανῶς τῆς προειρημένης αἱρέσεως πληρέστατα διηύθυνεν τὴν πλάνην.
 ταῦτα καἰ ὁ Ἀπολλώνιος.
 ΧΙΧ.
 Τῶν δὲ’ Απολιναρίου κατὰ τῆς δηλωθείσης αἱρέσεως μνήμην πεποίηται Σεραπίων, ὃν ἐπὶ τῶν δηλουμένων χρόνων μετὰ Μαξιμῖνον ἐπίσκοπον τῆς Ἀντιοχέων ἐκκλησίας γενέσθαι κατέχει λόγος·
 μέμνηται δ’ αὐτοῦ ἐν ἰδίᾳ ἐπιστολῇ τῇ πρὸς Καρικὸν καὶ Πόντιον, ἐν ἧ διευθύνων καὶ αὐτὸς τὴν αὐτὴν αἵρεσιν, ἐπιλέγει ταῦτα·
 “ ὅπως δὲ καὶ τοῦτο εἰδῆτε ὅτι τῆς ψευδοῦς ταύτης τάξεως τῆς ἐπικαλουμένης νέας προφητείας ἐβδέλυκται ἢ ἐνέργεια παρὰ πάσῃ τῆ ἐν κόαμῳ ἀδελφότητι, whether these things are right οr not, and I will show that they have been done among them.
” This same Apollonius in the same book says thatit was forty years from the time when Montanus plotted his fictitious prophecy, to the time when he wrote his book.
 Αnd again he says that Zoticus, whom the former writer mentioned, when Maximilla pretended to prophesy in Pepuza had tried in opporition to confute the spirit which workedin her,but was prevented by those who agreed with her Ηe also mentions a certain Thraseas1 as oneofthe martyrs οf that time.
 Moreover, he says, as though from tradition, that the Sariour ordered his apostles not to leave Jerusalem for twelve years.
 He also makes quotations from the Apocalypse of John and tells how by divine power a dead man was raised by John himseK at Ephesus.
 Αnd he says other things by which he demonstrated powertullyand completely the error of the heresy under discussion.
 so far says Apollonius.
 XIX.
 Tradition says that Serapion was bishop of Antioch after Maximinus at the timereferred to,and he has mentioned the works of Apolinarius against the heresy described.
 Ηe mentions himin his own letter toCaricusand Pontius, in whieh he aho himself refutes the same heresy, and continues thus:
:
“ Αnd in order that youmay know this, that the working οf the so- called new prophecy of this false οrder is abominated in the whole οf Christendom πέπομφα ὑμῖν καὶ Κλαυδίου’ Απολιναρίου, τοῦ μακαριωτάτου γενομένου ἐν Ἱεραπόλει τῆς Ἀσίας ἐπισκόπου, γράμματα.’
’ ἐν ταύτῃ δὲ τῇ τοῦ Σεραπίωνος ἐπιατολῇ καὶ ὑποσημειώσεις φέρονται διαφόρων ἐπισκόπων, ὧν ὁ μέν τις ὧδέ πως ὑποσεσημείωται·
“ Αὐρήλιος Κυρίνιος μάρτυς ἐρρῶσθαι ὑμᾶς εὔχομαι, ” ὁ δέ τις τοῦτον τὸν τρόπον·
“ Αἴλιος Πούπλιος Ἰούλιος ἀπὸ Δεβελτοῦ κολωνίας τῆς Θρᾴκης ἐπίακοπος·
 ξῆ ὁ θεὸς ὁ ἐν τοῖς οὐρανοῖς, ὅτι Σωτᾶς ὁ μακάριος ὁ ἐν Ἀγχιάλῳ ἠθέλησε τὸν δαίμονα τὸν Πρισκίλλης ἐκβαλεῖν, καὶ οἱ ὑποκριταὶ οὐκ ἀφῆκαν. ’
 ’ καὶ ἄλλων δὲ πλειόνων τὸν ἀριθμὸν ἐπιακόπων αυμφήφων τούτοις ἐν τοῖς δηλωθεῖσιν γράμμασιν αὐτόγραφοι φέρονται σημειώσεις.
 καὶ τὰ μὲν κατὰ τούτους ἦν τοιαῦτα.
 XX.
 Ἐξ ἐναντίας δὲ τῶν ἐπὶ Ῥώμης τὸν ὑγιῆ τῆς ἐκκλησίας θεσμὸν παραχαραττόντων, Εἰρήναιος διαφόρους ἐπιστολὰς συντάττει, τὴν μὲν ἐπιγραφὰς Πρὸς Βλάστον περὶ σχίσματος, τὴν δὲ Πρὸς Φλωρῖνον περὶ μοναρχίας ἢ περὶ τοῦ μὴ εἶναι τὸν θεὸν ποιητὴν κακῶν.
 ταύτης γάρ τοι τῆς γνώμης οὗτος ἐδόκει προααπίξειν·
 δι’ ὃν αὖθις ὑποσυρόμενον τῆ κατὰ Οὐαλεντῖνον πλάνη καὶ τὸ Περὶ ὀγδοάδος συντάττεται τῷ Εἰρηναίῳ σπούδασμα, ἐν ᾧ καὶ ἐπισημαίνεται τὴν πρώτην τῶν ἀποστόλων κατειληφέναι ἑαυτὸν διαδοχήν·
 ἔνθα πρὸς τῷ τοῦ συγγράμματος τέλει χαριεστάτην αὐτοῦ σημείωσιν εὑρόντες, ἀναγκαίως καὶ ταύτην τῇδε καταλέξομεν τῆ γραφῆ, τοῦτον ἔχουσαν τὸν τρόπον·
“ ὁρκίζω σε τὸν μεταγραψόμενον τὸ βιβλίον τοῦτο κατὰ τοῦ κυρίου ἡμῶν Ἰησοῦ χριστοῦ καὶ κατὰ τῆς ἐνδόξου παρουσίας αὐτοῦ, ἦς ἔρχεται κρῖναι ζῶντας καὶ throughoutthe World,Ι have sent you the writings of Claudius Apolinarius, the bishop of Hierapolis in Αsia, of blesed” And in this letter of Serapion there are preserved the signatures various bishops, of whom one signed himselfI, Aurelius Cyrenaeus,a martyr, pray for your” as follows:
“ Ι, Aelius Publius Julius, bishop of Debeltum,a colony of Thrace.
 Αs God lives in the heavens the blessed Sotas in Anchialus wished to drive the devil out of Priscilla and the hypocrites would not let” The autograph signatures of many other bishops who agreed with them are also preserved in the above mentioned writing.
 so far concerning them.
 XX.
 In opposition to those in Rome who were discarding the sound ordinance of the church, Irenaeus composed various letters.
 He addressed one to Blastus On Schism, another to Florinus, On the Sole Sovereignty 1 οr That God is not theAuthorof Evil, for Florinus seemed to be defending this opinion.
 For his sake too, when hea attracted by the Valentinian error, a work was composed by Irenaeus On the Ogdoad,2 in which he also indicates that he hadhimself received the first succession of the apostles, and in it, at theendof the work, we finda most acceptable notice from him which we are obliged to give in this book and it runs as follows:
“Ι adjure thee, who shalt copyout this book, by our Lord Jesus Christ, by his glorious advent when he comes to judge the living and the dead, that thou νεκρούς, ἵνα ἀντιβάλῃς ὃ μετεγράψω, καὶ κατορθώσῃς ορθώσῃς αὐτὸ πρὸς τὸ ἀντίγραφον τοῦτο μετεγράψω, ἐπιμελῶς·
 καὶ τὸν ὅρκον τοῦτον ὁμοίως μεταγραφεῖς καὶ θήσεις ἐν τῷ ἀντιγράφῳ.
” καὶ ταῦτα δὲ ὠφελίμως ὑπ’ ἐκείνου λελέχθω πρὸς ἡμῶν τε ἱστορείσθω, ὡς ἄν ἔχοιμεν ἄριστον σπουδαιοτάτης ἐπιμελείας τοὺς ἀρχαίους ἐκείνους καὶ ὄντως ἱεροὺς ἄνδρας ὑπόδειγμα.
 Ἐν ἧ γε μὴν προειρήκαμεν πρὸς τὸν Φλωρῖνον ὁ Εἰρήναιος ἐπιστολῇ αὖθις τῆς ἅμα Πολυκάρπῳ συνουσίας αὐτοῦ μνημονεύει, λέγων·
 “ ταῦτα τὰ δόγματα, Φλωρῖνε, ἵνα πεφεισμένως εἴπω, οὐκ ἔστιν ὑγιοῦς γνώμης·
 ταῦτα τὰ δόγματα ἀσύμφωνά ἐστιν τῇ ἐκκλησίᾳ εἰς τὴν μεγίστην ἀσέβειαν περιβάλλοντα τοὺς πειθομένους αὐτοῖς·
 ταῦτα τὰ δόγματα οὐδὲ οἱ ἔξω τῆς ἐκκΛησίας αἱρετικοὶ ἐτόλμησαν ἀποφήνασθαί ποτε·
 ταῦτα τὰ δόγματα οἱ πρὸ ἡμῶν πρεσβύτεροι, οἱ καὶ τοῖς ἀποστόλοις συμφοιτήσαντες, οὐ παρέδωκάν σοι.
 εἶδον γάρ ἄε, παῖς ἔτι ὤν, ἐν τῆ κάτω Ἀσίᾳ παρὰ Πολυκάρπῳ, λαμπρῶς πράσσοντα ἐν τῆ βασιλικῇ αὐλῇ καὶ πειρώμενον εὐδοκιμεῖν παρ’ αὐτῷ.
 μᾶλλον γὰρ τὰ τότε διαμνημονεύω τῶν ἔναγχος γινομένων αἱ γὰρ ἐκ παίδων μαθήσεις συναύξουσαι τῇ ψυχῇ, ἑνοῦνται αὐτῇ), ὥστε με δύνασθαι εἰπεῖν καὶ τὸν τόπον ἐν ᾧ καθεζόμενος διελέγετο ὁ μακάριος Πολύκαρπος, καὶ τὰς προόδους αὐτοῦ καὶ τὰς εἰσόδους καὶ τὸν χαρακτῆρα τοῦ βίου καὶ τὴν τοῦ σώματος ἰδέαν καὶ τὰς διαλέξεις ἃς ἐποιεῖτο πρὸς τὸ πλῆθος, καὶ τὴν μετὰ Ἰωάννου συναναστρφὴν ὡς ἀπήγγελλεν καὶ τὴν μετὰ τῶν λοιπῶν τῶν ἑορακότων τὸν κύριον, καὶ ὡς ἀπεμνημόνευεν τοὺς compare what thou shalt transcribe and correct it with this copy whence thou art transcribing, with all care, and thou shalt likewise transeribe this oath and put it in the ” Μay his wordS be spoken to our profit and be narrated in order that we may keep those primitive and truly sacred men as the best example of the most zealous care.
 In the letterto Florinus, whieh we have spokenof above, Irenaeus again mentionS his intercourse with Polycarp, and says:
“ These opinions,Ο Florinus, that I may speak sparingly, do not belong to sound doctrine.
 These opinions are inconsistent withthe church,and bring those who believe in them into the greatest impiety.
 These opinions not even the hereties outside the church ever dared to proclaim.
 These opinions those who were presbyters before us, they whoaccompanied the apostleS, did not hand onto you.
 For while 1 was stilla boyΙ knew you in lower Asia in Polycarp 's house when you werea man rankin the royal hall and endeavouring to stand well with him.
I remember the eventS of those days more cleariy than those whieh happened recently, for what we learnas children growsup vith the souland is unitedto it, so thatI can speak even of the place in which the blessed Polycarpsatand disputed,how he cameinand went οut, the characterof his life, the appearance of his body, the discourses which he made to the people, how he reported his intercourse with John and with the others who had Seen the Lord, how he remembered their wordS, and what λόγους αὐτῶν, καὶ περὶ τοῦ κυρίου τίνα ἢν ἃ παρ’ ἐκείνων ἀκηκόει, καὶ περὶ τῶν δυνάμεων αὐτοῦ, καὶ περὶ τῆς διδασκαλίας, ὡς παρὰ τῶν αὐτοπτῶν τῆς ζωῆς τοῦ λόγου παρειληφὼς ὁ Πολύκαρπος ἀπήγγελλεν πάντα σύμφωνα ταῖς γραφαῖς.
 ταῦτα καὶ τότε διὰ τὸ ἔλεος τοῦ θεοῦ τὸ ἐπ’ ἐμοὶ γεγονὸς σπουδαίως ἤκουον, ὑπομνηματιζόμενος αὐτὰ οὐκ ἐν χάρτῃ, ἀλλ’ ἐν τῇ ἐμῇ καρδίᾳ·
 καἰ ἀεὶ διὰ τὴν χάριν τοῦ θεοῦ γνησίως αὐτὰ ἀναμαρυκῶμαι, καὶ δύναμαι διαμαρτύρασθαι ἔμπροσθεν τοῦ θεοῦ ὅτι εἴ τι τοιοῦτον ἀκηκόει ἐκεῖνος ὁ μακάριος καὶ ἀποστολικὸς πρεσβύτερος, ἀνακράξας ἄν καὶ ἐμφράξας τὰ ὦτα αὐτοῦ καὶ κατὰ τὸ σύνηθες αὐτῷ εἰπών ὦ καλὲ θεέ, εἰς οἵους με καιροὺς τετήρηκας, ἵνα τούτων ἀνέχωμαι,’ πεφεύγει ἄν καὶ τὸν τόπον ἐν ᾧ καθεζόμενος ἢ ἑστὼς τῶν τοιούτων ἀκηκόει λόγων.
 καὶ ἐκ τῶν ἐπιστολῶν δὲ αὐτοῦ ὧν ἐπέστειλεν ἤτοι ταῖς γειτνιώσαις ἐκκλησίαις, ἐπιστηρίζων αὐτάς, ἢ τῶν ἀδελφῶν τιαί, νουθετῶν αὐτοὺς καὶ προτρεπόμενος, δύναται Φανερωθῆναι.
 ” ταῦτα ὁ Εἰρηναῖος.
 XXI.
 Κατὰ δὲ τὸν αὐτὸν τῆς Κομόδου βασιλείας χρόνον μεταβέβλητο μὲν ἐπὶ τὸ πρᾶον τὰ καθ’ ἡμᾶς, εἰρήνης αὺν θείᾳ χάριτι τὰς καθ’ ὅΛης τῆς οἰκουμένης διαλαβούσης ἐκκλησίας·
 ὅτε καὶ ὁ σωτήριος λόγος ἐκ παντὸς γένους ἀνθρώπων πᾶσαν ὑπήγετο ψυχὴν ἐπὶ τὴν εὐσεβῆ τοῦ τῶν ὅλων θεοῦ θρῃσκείαν, ὡς ἤδη καὶ τῶν ἐπὶ ῾Ρώμης εὖ μάλα πλούτῳ καὶ γένει διαφανῶν πλείους ἐπὶ τὴν σφῶν ὁμόσε χωρεῖν πανοικεί τε καὶ παγγενεὶ σωτηρίαν.
 οὐκ ἦν δὲ ἄρα τοῦτο τῷ μισοκάλῳ δαίμονι βασκάνῳ ὄντι τὴν φύαιν οἰστόν, ἀπεδύετο δ’ οὗν εἰς αὖθις,werethe things concerningthe Lord which he had heard from them, and about their miracles, and about their teaching, and how Polycarp had received them from the eyewitnesses of the word of life, and reported all things in agreement with the Scriptures.
I listened eagerly even thento these things through the mercy of God which was given me, and made notes Of them, not on paper but in my heart, and everby the graceof God doΙ truly ruminateon them, andI can bear witness before God that if that blessed and apostolic presbyter had heard anything of this kind he would have cried out, and shuthis ears,and said accordingto his custom,‘Ο good God, to what time hast thou preserved me thatI should endure?' Ηe would havefled even the placein which he was seated or standing when he heard sueh words.
 And from his letters which he sent either tothe neighbouring churches, strengthening them, οr to some ofthe brethren, exhorting and warning them, this canbe made”So says Irenaeus.
 XXI.
 Αnd at the same time in the reign of Commodus our treatment was changed toa milder one, and by the grace of God peace came on the churches throughout the whole world.
 The word of salvation began` to lead every soul of every race men to the pious worship of the God of the universe, so that now manyof those who at Romewere famous for wealth and family turned to their own salvation with all their house and with all their kin.
 This was unendurable to the demon who hates good, envious as he is by nature, and heagainstripped for conflict, ποικίλας τὰς καθ’ ἡμῶν μηχανὰς ἐπιτεχνώμενος.
 ἐπὶ γοῦν τῆς‘ Ρωμαίων πόλεως Ἀπολλώνιον, ἄνδρα τῶν τότε πιστῶν ἐπὶ παιδείᾳ καὶ φιλοσοφίᾳ βεβοημένον, ἐπὶ δικαστήριον ἄγει, ἕνα γέ τινα τῶν εἰς ταῦτ’ ἐπιτηδείων αὐτῷ διακόνων ἐπὶ κατηγορίᾳ τἀνδρὸς ἐγείρας.
 ἀλλ’ ὁ μὲν δείλαιος παρὰ καιρὸν:
 τὴν δίκην εἰσελθών, ὅτι μὴ ξῆν ἐξὸν ἦν κατὰ βασιλικὸν ὅρον τοὺς τῶν τοιῶνδε μηνυτάς, αὐτίκα κατεάγνυται τὰ σκέλη, Περεννίου δικαστοῦ τοιαύτην κατ’ αὐτοῦ φῃφον ἀπενέγκαντος·
 ὁ δέ γε θεοφιλέστατος μάρτυς, πολλὰ λιπαρῶς ἱκετεύσαντος τοῦ δικαστοῦ καὶ λόγον αὐτὸν ἐπὶ τῆς συγκλήτου βουλῆς αἰτήσαντος, λογιωτάτην ὑπὲρ ἦς ἐμαρτύρει πίστεως ἐπὶ πάντων παρασχὼν ἀπολογίαν, κεφαλικῇ κολάσει ὡς ἂν ἀπὸ δόγματος συγκλήτου τελειοῦται, μηδ’ ἄλλως ἀφεῖσθαι τοὺς ἅπαξ εἰς δικαστήριον παριόντας καὶ μηδαμῶς τῆς προθέσεως μεταβαλλομένους ἀρχαίου παρ’ αὐτοῖς νόμου κεκρατηκότος.
 τούτου μὲν οὖν τὰς ἐπὶ τοῦ δικαστοῦ φωνὰς καὶ τὰς ἀποκρίσεις ἃς πρὸς πεῦσιν πεποίητο τοῦ Περεννίου, πὰσάν τε τὴν πρὸς τὴν σύγκλητον ἀπολογίαν, ὅτῳ διαγνῶναι φίλον, ἐκ τῆς τῶν ἀρχαίων μαρτύρων συναχθείσης ἡμῖν ἀναγραφῆς εἴσεται.
 XXII.
 Δεκάτῳ γε μὴν τῆς Κομόδου βασιλείας ἔτει δέκα πρὸς τρισὶν ἔτεσιν τὴν ἐπισκοπὴν λελειτουργηκότα Ἐλεύθερον διαδέχεται διαδέχεται ἐν ᾧ καὶ Ἰουλιανοῦ δέκατον ἔτος ἀποπλήσαντος, τῶν κατ’ Ἀλεξάνδρειαν παροικιῶν τὴν λειτουργίαν ἐγχειρίζεται Δημήτριος·
 καθ’ οὓς καὶ τῆς Ἀντιοχέων- χέων ἐκκΛησίας ὄγδοος ἀπὸ τῶν ἀποστόλων ὁ πρόσθεν ἤδη δεδηλωμένος ἔτι τότε Σεραπίωνandprepared various derices against uS.
 In the city οf the Romans he brought before thc court Apollonius,a man famous among the ChristianS of that time for his education and philosophy, and raised up to accuse him one οf his Servants who waS suitable for this.
 But the coward entered the case ata bad bme, for according to imperial decree informers on such points were not allowed to live;
 so they broke his legs at once, for the judge Perennius decreed this sentence against him.
 But the martyr, beloved of God, when the judge earnertly begged and prayed him to defend himself before the senate, made before every οnea most learned defence of the faith for which hc wasa martyr,and was consecrated by beheaffing as if bv decree of the senate:
 for an aneient law obtrialned among them that there should be no οther issue for the case οf those who once appeared befor the court and ffid not change their opinion.
 The words of Apollonius before the judge dge and the answers which he made to the interrogation οf Perennius, and all the defence which he made tothe senate,can be read by anyone who wishesinthe compilation whichwe have made οf the ancient martyrs.
 1 XXII.
 In the tenth year ofthe reign οf Commodus 2 victor sueceeded Eleutherus who had served in the episcopate thirteen years.
 Ιn the same year Julian had completed his tenth year, and Demetrius was appointed to the administration of the Alexandrian dioceses, and at the same time the famous Serapion, whom we mentioned before, was bishopof the ehurch ἐπίσκοπος ἐγνωρίζετο.
 Καισαρείας δὲ τῆς Παλαιστίνων Θεόφιλος, καὶ Νάρκισσος δὲ ὁμοίως, οὗ καὶ πρόσθεν ὁ λόγος μνήμην ἐποιήσατο, τῆς ἐν Ἱεροσολύμοις ἐκκλησίας ἔτι τότε τὴν λειτουργίαν εἶχεν, Κορίνθου δὲ τῆς καθ’ Ἑλλάδα κατὰ τοὺς αὐτοὺς ἐπίσκοπος ἦν Βάκχυλλος καὶ τῆς ἐν Ἐφέσω παροικίας Πολυκράτης.
 καὶ ἄλλοιδ’, ὥς γε εἰκός, ἐπὶ τούτοις μυρίοι κατὰ τούσδε διέπρεπον·
 ὧν γε μὴν ἔγγραφος ἡ τῆς πίστεως εἰς ἡμᾶς κατῆλθεν ὀρθοδοξία, τούτους εἰκότως ὀνομαστὶ κατελέξαμεν.
 XXIII.
 Ζητήσεως δῆτα κατὰ τούσδε οὐ σμικρᾶς ἀνακινηθείσης, ὅτι δὴ τῆς Ἀσίας ἁπάσης αἱ παροικίαι ὡς ἐκ παραδόσεως ἀρχαιοτέρας σελήνης τὴν τεσσαρεσκαιδεκάτην ᾤοντο δεῖν ἐπὶ τῆς τοῦ σωτηρίου πάσχα ἑορτῆς παραφυλάττειν, ἐν ᾖ θύειν τὸ πρόβατον Ἰουδαίοις προηγόρευτο, ὡς δέον ἐκ παντὸς κατὰ ταύτην, ὁποίᾳ δἂν ἡμέρᾳ τῆς ἑβδομάδος περιτυγχάνοι, τὰς τῶν ἀσιτιῶν ἐπιλύσεις ποιεῖσθαι, οὐκ ἔθους ὄντος τοῦτον ἐπιτελεῖν τὸν τρόπον ταῖς ἀνὰ τὴν λοιπὴν ἅπασαν οἰκουμένην ἐκκλησίαις, ἐξ ἀποστολικῆς παραδόσεως τὸ καὶ εἰς δεῦρο κρατῆσαν ἔθος φυλαττούσαις, ὡς μηδ’ ἑτέρᾳ προσήκειν παρὰ τὴν τῆς ἀναστάσεως τοῦ σωτῆρος ἡμῶν ἡμέρᾳ τὰς νηστείας ἐπιλύεσθαι, σύνοδοι δὴ καὶ συγκροτήσεις ἐπισκόπων ἐπὶ ταὐτὸν ἐγίνοντο, πάντες τε μιᾷ γνώμη δι’ ἐπιστολῶν ἐκκλησιαστικὸν δόγμα τοῖς πανταχόσε διετυποῦντο ὡς ἂν μηδ’ ἐν ἄλλῃ ποτὲ τῆς κυριακῆς ἡμέρᾳ τὸ τῆς ἐκ νεκρῶν ἀναστάσεως ἐπιτελοῖτο τοῦ κυρίου μυστήριον, καὶ ὅπως ἐν ταύτῃ μόνῃ τῶν κατὰ τὸ of Antiochand the eighthfrom the apostles.
 Theophilus ruled Caesarea in Palestine, and Narcissus, whomour workhas mentioned before, still holdingthe administration of the churchat Jerusalem.
 and at the sametime bacchyllus was bishop of Corinth in Greece and Polycrates of the diocese of Ephesus.
 There were also, of course, countless other famous men at this time, but we have naturally given the names of those the orthodoxy of whose faith has been preserved to us in writing.
 XXIII.
 At thattime time no small controversy arose because all the dioceses of Asia thought it right, as though by more ancient tradition, to observe for the feast of the Saniour's passover tbe fourteenth day of the moon, on which the Jews had been commanded to kill the lamb.
 Thus it was necessary to finish tbe faston that day, whatever dayof the Weekitmight be.
 1 Υet it was not the custom to celebrate in this manner in the churches throughout the rest of the world, for from apostolic tradition they kept the custom which still exists that it is not right to finish tbe fast on any day save that of the resurrection of our Saviour.
 Many meetings and conferences with bishops were beld on this point, and all unanimously formulated in their letters the doctrine of the church for those in every country country that the mystery of the Lord's resurrection from the dead could be celebrated on nodaysave Sunday, 2 and πάσχα νηστειῶν φυλαττοίμεθα τὰς ἐπιλύσεις.
 φέρεται δ’ εἰς ἔτι νῦν τῶν κατὰ Παλαιστίνην τηνικάδε συγκεκροτημένων γραφή, ὧν προυτέτακτο Θεόφιλος τῆς ἐν Καισαρείᾳ παροικίας ἐκίσκοπος καὶ Νίρκισσος τῆς ἐν Ἱεροσολύμοις, καὶ τῶν ἐπὶ Ῥώμηςδ’ ὁμοίως ἄλλη περὶ τοῦ αὐτοῦ ζητήματος, ἐπίσκοπον Βίκτορα δηλοῦσα, τῶν τε κατὰ Πόντον’ν ἐπισκόπων, ὧν Πάλμας ὡς ἀρχαιότατος προυτέτακτο, καὶ τῶν κατὰ Γαλλίαν δὲ παροικιῶν, ἃς Εἰρήναιος ἐπεσκόπει, ἔτι τε τῶν κατὰ τὴν Ὀσροηνὴν καὶ τὰς ἐκεῖσε πόλεις, καὶ ἰδίως Βακχύλλου τῆς Κορινθίων ἐκκλησίας ἐπισκόπου, καὶ πλείστων ὅσων ἄλλων, οἳ μίαν καὶ τὴν αὐτὴν δόξαν τε καὶ κρίσιν ἐξενηνεγμένοι, τὴν αὐτὴν τέθεινται ψῆφον.
 XXIV.
 καὶ τούτων μὲν ἦν ὅρος εἷς, ὁ δεδηλωμένος·
 τῶν δὲ ἐπὶ τῆς Ἀσίας ἐπισκόπων τὸ πάλαι πρότερον αὐτοῖς παραδοθὲν διαφυλάττειν ἔθος χρῆναι διισχυριζομένων ἡγεῖτο Πολυκράτης·
 ὃς καὶ αὐτὸς ἐν ᾗ πρὸς Βίκτορα καὶ τὴν Ῥωμαίων ἐκκλησίαν διετυπώσατο γραφῆ τὴν εἰς αὐτὸν ἐλθοῦσαν παράδοσιν ἐκτίθεται διὰ τούτων·
“ ἡμεῖς οὖν ἀρᾳδιούργητον ἄγομεν τὴν ἡμέραν, μήτε προστιθέωτες μήτε ἀφαιρούμενοι.
 καὶ γὰρ κατὰ τὴν Ἀσίαν μέγαλα στοιχεῖα κεκοίμηται·
 ἅτινα ἀναστήσεται τῇ ἡμέρᾳ τῆς παρουσίας τοῦ κυρίου, ἐν ἢ ἔρχεται μετὰ δόξης ἐξ οὐρανῶν καὶ ἀναζητήσει πάντας τοὺς ἁγίους, Φίλιππον τῶν δώδεκα ἀποστόλων, ὃς κεκοίμηται ἐν Ἱεραπόλει καὶ δύο θυγατέρες αὐτοῦ γεγηρακυῖαι παρθένοι καὶ ἡ ἑτέρα αὐτοῦ θυγάτηρ ἐν ἁγίῳ πνεύματι πολιτευσαμένη ἐν Ἐφέσω ἀναπαύεται·
 ἔτι δὲ καὶ:
 that οn thatdayalone we should celebratethe end ofthepaschal faSt.
 Thcre is still eXtallt a writing of those who were eonvened in Palestine, οver whom piesided Theophilus, bishop of the dioeeSe of Caesarea, and Narcissus, bishop of Jerusalem;
 and there is similarly another from those in Rome on the same eontroversy, which gives Vietor as bishop;
 and there is one of the bishops of Pontus over whom Palmas presided as the oldest;
 and of the dioceses of Oaul, of which Irenaeus was biShop bishop;
 and yet οthers οf those in OSrhoene and the citieS there;
 and particularly οf Bacchyllus, the bishopof the churehof Corinth;
 and οf very many moiewho expreSsed oneandthe Same opinionand judgement,and gave the same vote.
 XXIV.
 These iSsued the single definition which was given above;
 but the bishops in Asia were led by Polycrates in persisting that it was necessary to keep the custom whieh had been handed doWn to them of old.
 Polycrates himself ina document whichhe addreSsed to victorandto the church of Rome, expounds the traffition which had come to him as follows.
“ Therefore we keeptheday undeviatingly, neither adding nor taking away, for in Αsia great luminaries1 sleep,and they will rise on the day of the coming of the Lord, when he shall come with glory from heaven and seek out2 all the saints.
 sueh were Philip of the twelve apostles, and two of his daughters Who grew old as virgins, who sleep in Hierapolis, and anotherdaughter of his, who lived in the Ηoly spirit, reSts at Ephesus.
 Moreover, Ἰωάννης ὁ ἐπὶ τὸ στῆθος τοῦ κυρίου ἀναπεσών, ὃς ἐγενήθη ἱερεὺς τὸ πέταλον πεφορεκὼς καὶ μάρτυς καὶ διδάσκαλος·
 οὗτος ἐν Ἐφέσω κε·
 κοίμηται, ἔτι δὲ καὶ Πολύκαρπος ἐν Σμύρνῃ, καὶ ἐπίσκοπος καὶ μάρτυς·
 καὶ Θρασέας καὶ ἐπίσκοπος καὶ μάρτυς ἀπὸ Εὐμενείας, ὃς ἐν Σμύρνῃ κεκοίμηται τί δὲ δεῖ λέγειν Σάγαριν ἐπίσκοπον καὶ μάρτυρα, ὃς ἐν Λαοδικείᾳ κεκοίμηται, ἔτι δὲ καὶ Παπίριον τὸν μακάριον καὶ Μελίτωνα τὸν εὐνοῦχον, τὸν ἐν ἁγίῳ πνεύματι πάντα πλιτευσάμενον, ὃς κεῖται ἐν Σάρδεσιν περιμένων τὴν ἀπὸ τῶν οὐρανῶν ἐπισκοπὴν ἐν ᾗ ἐκ νεκρῶν ἀναστήσεται;
 οὗτοι πάντες ἐτήρησαν τὴν ἡμέραν τῆς πεσσαρεσκαιδεκάτης τοῦ πάσχα κατὰ τὸ εὐαγγέλιον, μηδὲν παρεκβαίνοντες, ἀλλὰ κατὰ τὸν κανόνα τῆς πίστεως ἀκολουθοῦντες·
 ἔτι δὲ κἀγὼ ὁ μικρότερος πάντων ὑμῶν Πολυκράτης, κατὰ παράδοσιν τῶν συγγενῶν μου, οἷς καὶ παρηκοΛούθησά τισιν αὐτῶν.
 ἑπτὰ μὲν ἦσαν συγγενεῖς μου ἐπίσκοποι, ἐγὼ δὲ ὄγδοος·
 καὶ πάντοτε τὴν ἡμέραν ἤγαγον οἱ συγγενεῖς μου ὅταν ὁ λαὸς ἤρνυεν τὴν ζύμην.
 ἐγὼ οὖν, ἀδελφοί, ἑξήκοντα πέντε ἔτη ἔχων ἐν κυρίῳ καὶ συμβεβληκὼς τοῖς ἀπὸ τῆς οἰκουμένης ἀδελφοῖς καὶ πᾶσαν ἁγίαν γραφὴν διεληλυθώς, οὐ πτύρομαι ἐπὶ τοῖς καταπλησσομένοις·
 οἱ γὰρ ἐμοῦ μείζονες εἰρήκασι‘ πειθαρχεῖν δεῖ θεῷ μᾶλλον ἢ ἀνθρώποις.
' ” τούτοις ἐπιφέρει περὶ τῶν γράφοντι συμπαρόντων αὐτῷ καὶ ὁμοδοξούντων ἐπισκόπων ταῦτα λέγων“ ἐδυνάμην δὲ τῶν ἐπισκόπων τῶν συμπαρόντων μνημονεῦσαι, οὓς ὑμεῖς ἠξιώσατε μετακληθῆναι ὑπ’ ἐμοῦ καὶ μετεκαλεσάμην·
 ὧν τὰ ὀνόματα ἐὰν γράφω, πολλὰ πλήθη εἰσίν·
 οἱ δὲ εἰδότες τὸν thereis also John, who lay on the Lord's breast,who wasa priest wearing the breastplate, anda martyr, and teacher.
 Ηe sleeps at Εphesus.
 Αnd there is also Ρolycarp at smyrna, both bishop and martyr, and Thraseas, both bishopand martyr,from Εumenaea,who sleeps in Smyrna.
 Αnd why shouldI speak of Sagaris, bishop and martyr, who sleeps at Laodicaea, and Papirius, too, the blessed, and Melito the eunuch, who livedentirelyinthe Ηoly Spirit, who liesin sardis, waiting forthe visitation from heaven when he will rise from the dead? Αll these kept the fourteenth day of the passover accorffing to the gospel, never swerving, but following according to the ruleof the faith.
 ΑndI also, Ρolycrates, the leastof you all, live according to the tradition οf my kinsmen, and some or them haveI followed.
 For seven of my family were bishops and 1 am the eighth, and my kinsmen ever kept the day when the people put away the leaven.
 Therefore, brethren,Ι who have lived sixty- nve years in the Lord and conversed with brethren from every country, and have studied all holy scripture, am not afraid of threats, for they have said who were greater than I,‘ It is betterto obey ood rather than men. ’
” Ηe continues aboutthe bishops who when he wrote were with him and shared his opimon, and says thus:
“ AndI could mentionthe bishops whoare present whom you requiredme to summon, andI did so.
 IfI should write their names they would be many multitudes;
 and they knowing my feeble μικρόν μου ἄνθρωπον συνηυδόκησαν τῆ ἐπιστολῇ, εἰδότες ὅτι εἰκῆ πολιὰς οὐκ ἤνεγκα, ἀλλ’ ἐν Χριστῷ Ἰησοῦ πάντοτε πεπολίτευμαι.
” Επὶ τούτοις ὁ μὲν τῆς‘ Ρωμαίων προεστὼς Βίκτωρ ἀθρόως τῆς Ἀσίας πάσης ἅμα ταῖς ὁμόροις ἐκκλησίαις τὰς παροικίας ἀποτέμνειν, ὡς ἂν ἑτεροδοξούσας, τῆς κοινῆς ἑνώσεως πειρᾶται, καὶ στηλιτεύει γε διὰ γραμμάτων ἀκοινωνήτους πάντας ἄρδην τοὺς ἐκεῖσε ἀνακηρύττων ἀδελφούς·
 ἀλλ’ οὐ πᾶσί γε τοῖς ἐπισκόποις ταῦτ' ἠρέσκετο.
 ἀντιπαρακελεύονται δῆτα αὐτῷ τὰ τῆς εἰρήνης καὶ τῆς πρὸς τοὺς πλησίον ἑνώσεώς τε καὶ ἀγάπης φρονεῖν, φέρονται δὲ καὶ αἱ τούτων φωναὶ πληκτικώτερον καθαπτομένων τοῦ Βίκτορος·
 ἐν οἷς καὶ ὁ Εἰρήναιος ἐκ προσώπου ὧν ἡγεῖτο κατὰ τὴν Γαλλίαν ἀδελφῶν ἐπιστείλας, παρίσταται μὲν τῷ δεῖν ἐν μόνη τῆ τῆς κυριακῆς ἡμέρᾳ τὸ τῆς τοῦ κυρίου ἀναστάσεως ἐπιτελεῖσθαι μυστήριον, τῷ γε μὴν Βίκτορι προσηκόντως, ὡς μὴ ἀποκόπτοι ὅλας ἐκκλησίας θεοῦ ἀρχαίου ἔθους παράδοσιν ἐπιτηρούσας, πλεῖστα ἕτερα παραινεῖ, καὶ αὐτοῖς δὲ ῥήμασιν τάδε ἐπιλέγων·
 ἴ’ οὐδὲ γὰρ μόνον περὶ τῆς ἡμέρας ἐστὶν ἡ ἀμφισβήτησις, ἀλλὰ καὶ περὶ τοῦ εἴδους αὐτοῦ τῆς νηστείας.
 οἱ μὲν γὰρ οἴονται μίαν ἡμέραν δεῖν αὐτοὺς νηστεύειν, οἱ δὲ δύο, οἱ δὲ καὶ πλείονας·
 οἱ δὲ τεσσαράκοντα ὥρας ἡμερινάς τε καὶ νυκτερινὰς συμμετροῦσιν τὴν ἡμέραν αὐτῶν.
 καὶ τοιαύτη μὲν ποικιλία τῶν ἐπιτηρούντων οὐ νῦν ἐφ’ ἡμῶν γεγονυῖα, ἀλλὰ καὶ πολὺ πρότερον humanity, agreed with the lerter, knowing thatnot in vainismy head grey, but that1 have ever lived in Christ Jesus.
” Upon this Victor,who presided at Rome, immediately triedto cut off from the common unity the dioceses of all Αsia, together with the adjacent churches, οn the ground of heterodoxy, and he indited letters announcing that all the Christians there were absolutely excommunicated.
 But by no means all were pleasedby this, so they isSued counter- requests to him to consider the cause of peace and unity and love towards his neighbours.
 Thcir words are extant, sharply rebuking victor.
 Αmοng them too Irenaeus, writing inthe name of the Christians whose leader he was in Oaul, though he recommends that the mystery of the’s resurrection be observed only οn the Lord's day, yet nevertheless exhorts victor suitably and at length notto excommunicate whole churches of God for followinga traffidltion οf ancient custom, and eontinues as follows:
“ For the controversyis not onlyaboutthe day, but also about the actual character οf the fast;
 for some think that they ought to fast οne day, others two, others even more, some count their day as forty hours, day and night.
 1 Αnd such variation of observance ffid not begin in οur own timep but much earlier, in the days of οur predecessors who, sἐπὶ τῶν πρὸ ἡμῶν, τῶν παρὰ τὸ ἀκριβές, ὡς εἰκός, κρατούντων τὴν καθ’ ἁπλότητα καὶ ἰδιωτισμὸν συνήθειαν εἰς τὸ μετέπειτα πεποιηκότων, καὶ οὐδὲν ἔλαττον πάντες οὗτοι εἰρήνευσάν τε καὶ εἰρηνεύομεν πρὸς ἀλλήλους, καὶ ἢ διαφωνία τῆς νηστείας τὴν ὁμόνοιαν τῆς πίστεως συνίστησιν.
 ” Τούτοις καὶ ἱστορίαν προστίθησιν, ἢν οἰκείως παραθήσομαι, τοῦτον ἔχουσαν τὸν τρόπον·
“ ἐν οἷς καὶ οἱ πρὸ Σωτῆρος πρεσβύτεροι, οἱ προστάντες τῆς ἐκκλησίας ἧς σὺ νῦν ἀφηγῇ, Ἀνίκητον λέγομεν καὶ Πίον‘ Υγῖνόν τε καὶ Τελεσφόρον Ξύστον, οὔτε αὐτοὶ ἐτήρησαν οὔτε τοῖς μετ’ αὐτῶν ἐπέτρεπον, καὶ οὐδὲν ἔλαττον αὐτοὶ μὴ τηροῦντες εἰρήνευον τοῖς ἀπὸ τῶν παροικιῶν ἐν αἷς ἐτηρεῖτο, ἐρχομένοις πρὸς αὐτούς·
 καίτοι μᾶλλον ἐναντίον ἦν τὸ τηρεῖν τοῖς μὴ τηροῦσιν.
 καὶ οὐδέποτε διὰ τὸ εἶδος τοῦτο ἀπεβΛήθησάν τινες, ἀλλ’ αὐτοὶ μὴ τηροῦντες οἱ πρὸ ἀοῦ πρεσβύτεροι τοῖς ἀπὸ τῶν παροικιῶν τηροῦσιν ἔπεμπον εὐχαριστίαν, καὶ τοῦ μακαρίου Πολυκάρπου ἐπιδημήσαντος τῇ Ρώμῃ ἐπὶ Ἀνικήτου καὶ περὶ ἄλλων τινῶν μικρὰ σχόντες πρὸς ἀλλήλους, εὐθὺς εἰρήνευσαν, περὶ τούτου τοῦ κεφαλαίου μὴ φιλεριστήσαντες εἰς ἑαυτούς.
 οὔτε γὰρ ὁ Ἀνίκητος Ἀνίκητος τὸν Πολύκαρπον πεῖσαι ἐδύνατο μὴ τηρεῖν, ἅτε μετὰ Ἰωάννου τοῦ μαθητοῦ τοῦ κυρίου ἡμῶν καὶ τῶν λοιπῶν ἀποστόλων οἷς συνδιέτριψεν, ἀεὶ τετηρηκότα, οὔτε μὴν ὁ Πολύκαρπος τὸν Ἀνίκητον Ἀνίκητον ἔπεισεν τηρεῖν,it would appear, ffisregarding strictness maintained a practice which is simple and yet allows for personal preference, establishing it for the future, and none the less all these lived in peace, and we also live in peace with one another and the disagreement in the fast connrms οur agreement in the faith.
” Ηe addstothisa narrative whiehImay suitably quote, running as follows:
“ Among these too were the presbyters before soter, who presided over church of which you are now the leader,I mean Anicetus and Ρius and telesphorusand Xystus.
 ney did notthemselves observe it, 1 nor ffid they enjoin it οn thosewho followed them, and thoughthey ffidId not keep it they Were none the less at peace with those from the ffioceses in which it was οbserved when tbey came to them, although to observe it was more objectionable to those who ffid not do so, 2 Αnd no οne was ever rejected for this reason, but the presbyters before you who did not observe it sent the Εucharist to those from other dioceses who did;
 and when the blessed Polycarp was staying in Rome in the timeof Anicetus, though they disagreeda little about some other things as well, they immediately made peace, having no wish for strife between them on this marter.
 For neither waS Anicetus able to persuade Polycarp not to observe it, inasmuch ashe had always done so in company with John the disciple of οur Lord and the other apostles with whom he had associated;
 nor did Polycarp persuade Anicetusto observe it, for he said that he ought to λέγοντα τὴν συνήθειαν τῶν πρὸ αὐτοῦ πρεσβυτερων ὀφείλειν κατέχειν.
 καὶ τούτων οὕτως ἐχόντων, ἐκοινώνησαν ἑαυτοῖς, καὶ ἐν τῆ ἐκκλησίᾳ παρεχώρησεν ὁ Ἀνίκητος τὴν εὐχαριστίαν τῷ Πολυκάρπῳ, κατ’ ἐντροπὴν δηλονότι, καὶ μετ’ εἰρήνης ἀπ’ ἀλλήλων ἀπηλλάγησαν, πάσης τῆς ἐκκλησίας εἰρήνην ἐχόντων, καὶ τῶν τηρούντων καὶ τῶν μὴ τηρούντων.
” Καὶ ὁ μὲν Εἰρήναιος φερώνυμός τις ὢν τῆ προσηγορίᾳ αὐτῷ τε τῷ τρόπῳ εἰρηνοποιός, τοιαῦτα ὑπὲρ τῆς τῶν ἐκκλησιῶν εἰρήνης παρεκάλει τε καὶ ἐπρέσβευεν, ὁ δ’ αὐτὸς οὐ μόνῳ τῷ Βίκτορι, καὶ διαφόροις δὲ πλείστοις ἄρχουσιν ἐκκλησιῶν τὰ κατάλληλα δι’ ἐπιστολῶν περὶ τοῦ κεκινημένου ζητήματος ὡμίλει.
 XXV.
 Οἵ γε μὴν ἐπὶ Παλαιστίνης, οὓς ἀρτίως διεληλύθαμεν, ὅ τε Νάρκισσος καὶ Θεόφιλος, καὶ σὺν αὐτοῖς Κάσσιος τῆς κατὰ Τύρον ἐκκλησία ἐπίσκοπος καὶ Κλάρος τῆς ἐν Πτολεμαΐδι Οἵ τε μετὰ τούτων συνεληλυθότες, περὶ τῆς κατελθούσης εἰς αὐτοὺς ἐκ διαδοχῆς τῶν ἀποστόλων περὶ τοῦ πάσχα παραδόσεως πλεῖστα διειληφότες, κατὰ τὸ τέλος τῆς γραφῆς αὐτοῖς ῥήμασιν ἐπιλέγουσιν ταῦτα·
 “ τῆς τῆς δ’ ἐπιστολῆς ἡμῶν πειράθητε κατὰ πᾶσαν παροικίαν ἀντίγραφα διαπέμψασθαι, ὅπως μὴ ἔνοχοι ὦμεν τοῖς ῥᾳδίως πλανῶσιν ἑαυτῶν τὰς ψυχάς.
 δηλοῦμεν δὲ ὑμῖν ὅτι τῆ αὐτὴ ἡμέρᾳ καὶ ἐν Ἀλεξανδρείᾳ ἄγουσιν ᾗπερ καὶ ἡμεῖς·
 παρ’ ἡμῶν γὰρ τὰ γράμματα κομίζεται αὐτοῖς καὶ ἡμῖν παρ’ αὐτῶν, ὥστε συμφώνως καὶ ὁμοῦ ἄγειν ἡμᾶς τὴν ἁγίαν ἡμέραν.
” XXVI.
 Ἀλλὰ γὰρ πρὸς τοῖς ἀποδοθεῖσιν Εἰρη- keep the eustom of thOse who Vere presbyters before him.
 Αnd under these circumstances they communicated Vith eaeh other, and inthe church Anicetus yielded the eelebrariOn Of rile Fucharist to Polycarp ObViouriyoutOf respect, and tbey parted from each other in peace, fOr the peace Of the whole church was kept both by thOse who obserVCd and by those Who did not.
” Αnd Irenaeus, who deserVedhis name, making an eireniconinthis vay, gaVe exhortations of this kind for the peace of the church and served as as ambassador, for in letters he diseussed the Various views on the issue vhieh had been raised, not Only with Vletor but with Vith many other rulers of churehes.
 XXV.
 The Palestinians whom Ve bave reeenriy mentioned, that is to say Narcissus and Theophilus, and with them Cassius, the bishopof the churchin Tyre, and Clarus, the birilop Of the church in Ptolemais, and thoSe Vho aembled rith them, treated at length the tradition concerning rile passover which had come down tO them frOm the succession of the apostles, and attheend Of their riringtheyadd as follows:
“ Try tO send copies of Our letter to eVery diocese that ve may nOt be guilty towards thOse who easily deeeiVe tbeir own sOulS.
 Αnd Ve make it plain tO you that in Alexandria also they celebrate the Same dayasdo we, for letters have been eXehanged between them and us, so thatweobserVe the holydaytogether and in agreement.
” XXVI.
 Ιn addition tothe published treatises ναίου συγγράμμασιν καὶ ταῖς ἐπιστολαῖς φέρεταί τις αὐτοῦ πρὸς Ἕλληνας λόγος συντομώτατος καὶ τὰ μάλιστα ἀναγκαιότατος, Περὶ ἐπιστήμης ἐπιγεγραμμένος, καὶ ἄλλος, ὃν ἀνατέθεικεν ἀδελφῷ Μαρκιανῷ τοὔνομα εἰς ἐπίδειξιν τοῦ ἀποστολικοῦ κηρύγματος, καὶ βιβλίον τι διαλέξεων διαφόρων, ἐν ᾧ τῆς πρὸς Ἑβραίους ἐπιστολῆς καὶ τῆς λεγομένης Σολομῶνος Σοφίας μνημονεύει, ῥητά τινα ἐξ αὐτῶν παραθέμενος.
 καὶ τὰ μὲν εἰς ἡμετέραν ἐλθόντα γνῶσιν τῶν Εἰρηναίου τοσαῦτα.
 Κομόδου δὲ τὴν ἀρχὴν ἐπὶ δέκα καὶ τρισὶν ἔτεσιν καταλύσαντος, αὐτοκράτωρ Σευῆρος οὐδ’ ὅλοις μησὶν ἓξ μετὰ τὴν Κομόδου τελευτὴν Περτίνακος διαγενομένου κρατεῖ.
 XXVII.
 πλεῖστα μὲν οὖν παρὰ πολλοῖς εἰς ἔτι νῦν τῶν τότε σῴζεται παλαιῶν καὶ ἐκκλησιαστικῶν ἀνδρῶν ἐναρέτου σπουδῆς ὑπομνήματα·
 ὧν γε μὴν αὐτοὶ διέγνωμεν, εἴη ἂν τὰ Ἡρακλείτου εἰς τὸν ἀπόστολον, καὶ τὰ Μαξίμου περὶ τοῦ πολυθρυλήτου παρὰ τοῖς αἱρεσιώταις ζητήματος τοῦ πόθεν ἡ κακία, καὶ περὶ τοῦ γενητὴν ὑπάρχειν τὴν ὕλην, τά τε Κανδίδου εἰς τὴν ἑξαήμερον, καὶ Ἀπίωνος εἰς τὴν αὐτὴν ὑπόθεσιν, ὁμοίως Σέξτου περὶ ἀναστάσεως, καὶ ἄλλη τις ὑπόθεσις Ἀραβιανοῦ, καὶ μυρίων ἄλλων, ὧν διὰ τὸ μηδεμίαν ἔχειν ἀφορμὴν οὐχ οἷόν τε οὔτε τοὺς χρόνους παραδοῦναι γραφῆ οὔθ’ ἰατορίας μνήμην ὑποσημήνασθαι.
 καὶ ἄλλων δὲ πλείστων, ὧν οὐδὲ τὰς προσηγορίας καταλέγειν ἡμῖν δυνατόν, ἦλθον εἰς ἡμᾶς λόγοι, ὀρθοδόξων μὲν καὶ ἐκκλη- and to thelettersof Irenaeus, there is extanta concise and extremely convincing treatise of hiS againstthe Greeks,entitled Concerning Knowledge, and another vhieh he has dedicated to a Christian named Marcian on the Demonstration of the Apostolic Preaching, anda little book of Various discourses in which he menrions the Epistle to the Hebrewsand the so- called Wisdomof solOmon,quoting certain passages from them.
 such is the extent Of our knovledge of the works of Irenaeus.
 When CommoduS had riniShed his relgn after thirteen years severus became emperor not quite six monthS after the deathOr CommOdus, Pertinax coming in the interval.
 1 XXVII.
 Many workes of the Virtuous zeal of the aneient members of rile church of that time have still been widely preserved until now, and we haVc read them OurselveS.
 such are the writings of Heraclituson the Epistles, 2 and the writings of Maximus on the problem of the source of eVri;
 sO much traversed by the heretic, and onwhether matter hasan origin,the works of Candidusonthe Hexaëmeron,3 and of Apion On the same subject, also of seXtuSon the Resurrection, and anothertreatiseof Arabianus,and eountless Others of whieh We are unable from lack of evidenee to give the date or any aecOunts Of their hiStOry.
 Αnd there are many otherS alSo which have reaehed uS, but we cannot even giVe their names, yet theyare orthodox σιαστικῶν, ὥς γε δὴ ἡ ἐκάστου παραδείκνυσιν τῆς θείας γραφῆς ἑρμηνεία, ἀδήλωνδ’ ὅμως ἡμῖν, ὅτι μὴ τὴν προσηγορίαν ἐπάγεται τῶν συγγραψαμένων.
 XXVIII.
 τούτων ἔν τινος σπουδάσματι κατὰ τῆς’ Ἀρτέμωνος αἱρέσεως πεπονημένῳ, ἢν αὖθις ὁ ἐκ Σαμοσάτων Παῦλος καθ’ ἡμᾶς ἀνανεώσασθαι πεπείραται, φέρεταί τις διήγησις ταῖς ἐξεταζομέναις ἡμῖν προσήκουσα ἱστορίαις.
 τὴν γάρ τοι δεδηλωμένην αἵρεσιν φίλον ἄνθρωπον γενέσθαι τὸν σωτῆρα φάσκουσαν οὐ πρὸ πολλοῦ τε νεωτερισθεῖσαν διευθύνων, ἐπειδὴ ἐπειδὴ αὐτὴν ὡς ἂν ἀρχαίαν οἱ ταύτης ἤθελον εἰσηγηταί, πολλὰ καὶ ἄλλα εἰς ἔλεγχον αὐτῶν τῆς βλασφήμου ψευδηγορίας παραθεὶς ὁ λόγος ταῦτα κατὰ λέξιν ἱστορεῖ·
“ φασὶν γὰρ τοὺς μὲν προτέρους ἅπαντας καὶ αὐτοὺς τοὺς ἀποστόλους παρειληφέναι τε καὶ δεδιδαχέναι ταῦτα ἃ νῦν οὗτοι λέγουσιν, καὶ τετηρῆσθαι τὴν ἀλήθειαν τοῦ κηρύγματος μέχρι τῶν Βίκτορος χρόνων, ὃς ἢν τρισκαιδέκατος ἀπὸ Πέτρου ἐν‘ ρώμῃ ἐπίσκοπος·
 ἀπὸ δὲ τοῦ διαδόχου αὐτοῦ Ζεφυρίνου παρακεχαράχθαι τὴν ἀλήθειαν.
 ἦν δ’ ἂν τυχὸν πιθανὸν τὸ λεγόμενον, εἰ μὴ πρῶτον μὲν ἀντέπιπτον αὐτοῖς αἱ θεῖαι γραφαί·
 καὶ ἀδελφῶν δέ τινων ἔστιν γράμματα, πρεσβύτερα τῶν βίκτορος χρόνων, ἃ ἐκεῖνοι καὶ πρὸς τὰ ἔθνη ὑπὲρ τῆς ἀληθείας καὶ πρὸς τὰς τότε αἱρέσεις ἔγραψαν, λέγω δὲ ἰουστίνου καὶ Μιλτιάδου καὶ Τατιανοῦ καὶ Κλήμεντος καὶ ἑτέρων πλειόνων, ἐν οἷς ἅπασιν θεολογεῖται ὁ χριστός.
 τὰ γὰρ Εἰρηναίου τε καὶ Μελίτωνος καὶ τῶν λοιπῶν τίς ἀγνοεῖ βιβλία, θεὸν καὶ ἄνθρωπον καταγγέλλονταand Christian,as their interpretation of the dirine Scripture demonstrates, but the writers are unknown to us bccause their names are not given in their writings.
 XXVIII.
 In a treatise worked out by one of these against the heresy of Αrtemon, which Ρaul of Samosata has tried to renew in our time, there is extant an account which bears οn the history which we are examining.
 For he criticizes the abovementioned heresy( which claims that thesarivlourwasa mere man)asa recent innovation, beeause those who introduced it wished to make it respectable as being ancient.
 Among many other points adduced in refutation of their blasphemous falsehood, the treatise rehtes this this:
“ For For theysay that allwhowent before andthe apostles themselves received and taught what they now say, and that the truth of the teaching was preserved until the times οf victor, who was the tffihlrteenth bishop in Rome after Ρeter, but that the truth had been corrupted from the time of his successor, Zephyrinus.
 What they said might perhaps be plausible if inthe nrst placethedirine scriptures were not opposed to them, and there are also writings of certain christians, older than the time of Victor, wHch they wrote to the Gentiles οn behalf of the truth and against the heresies of their οwn time.
 1 mean the works of Justin and Miltiades and Tatian and Clement and many others in all of which Christ is treated as God.
 For who is ignorant of the books of Irenaeus and Melito and the others who announced Christ as God τὸν χριστόν, ψαλμοὶ δὲ δάοι καὶ ᾠδαὶ ἀδελφῶν ἑ ἀπ’ ἀρχῆς ὑπὸ πιστῶν γραφεῖσαι τὸν λόγον τοῦ θεοῦ τὸν Χριστὸν ὑμνοῦσιν θεολογοῦντες;
 πῶς οὖν ἐκ τοσούτων ἐτῶν καταγγελλομένου τοῦ ἐκκλησιαστικοῦ φρονήματος, ἐνδέχεται τοὺς μέχρι Βίκτορος οὕτως ὡς οὗτοι λέγουσιν κεκηρυχέναι;
 πῶς δὲ οὐκ αἰδοῦνται ταῦτα Βίκτορος καταψεύδεσθαι, ἀκριβῶς εἰδότες ὅτι Βίκτωρ Θεόδοτον τὸν σκυτέα, τὸν ἀρχηγὸν καὶ πατέρα ταύτης τῆς ἀρνησιθέου ἀποστασίας, ἀπεκήρυξεν τῆς κοινωνίας, πρῶτον εἰπόντα φίλον ἄνθρωπον τὸν χριστόν;
 εἰ γὰρ Βίκτωρ κατ’ αὐτοὺς οὕτως ἐφρόνει ὡς ἡ τούτων διδάσκει βλασφημία, πῶς ἂν ἀπέβαλεν Θεόδοτον τὸν τῆς αἱρέσεως ταύτης εὑρετήν;
” Καὶ τὰ μὲν κατὰ τὸν Βίκτορα τοσαῦτα·
 τούτου δὲ ἔτεσιν δέκα προστάντος τῆς λειτουργίας διάδοχος καθίσταται Ζεφυρῖνος ἀμφὶ τὸ ἔνατον τῆς Σευήρου βασιλείας ἔτος.
 προστίθησιν δὲ ὁ τὸ προειρημένον συντάξας περὶ τοῦ κατάρξαντος τῆς δηλωθείσης αἱρέσεως βιβλίον καὶ ἄλλην κατὰ Ζεφυρῖνον γενομένην πρᾶξιν, ὧδέ πως αὐτοῖς ῥήμασι γράφων·
“ ὑπομνήσω γοῦν πολλοὺς τῶν ἀδελφῶν πρᾶγμα ἐφ’ ἡμῶν γενόμενον, ὃ νομίζω ὅτι εἰ ἐν Σοδόμοις ἐγεγόνει, τυχὸν ἂν κἀκείνους ἐνουθέτησεν.
 Νατάλιος ἦν τις ὁμολογητής, οὐ πάλαι, ἀλλ’ ἐπὶ τῶν ἡμετέρων γενόμενος καιρῶν.
 οὗτος ἠπατήθη ποτὲ ὑπὸ Ἀσκληπιοδότου καὶ ἑτέρου Θεοδότου τινὸς τραπεζίτου·
 ἦσαν δὲ οὗτοι ἄμφω Θεοδότου τοῦ σκυτέως μαθηταὶ τοῦ πρώτου ἐπὶ ταύτῃ τῆ φρονήσει, μᾶλλον δὲ ἀφροσύνῃ, ἀφορισθέντος τῆς κοινωνίας ὑπὸ Βίκτορος, ὡς and man? Αnd all the Ρsalms and hymns which were written by faithful Christians from the beginning sing of the Christ as the LogoS of Ood and treat him as God.
 Ηοw then is it possible that aftcr the mind οf the church had been announced for so many years that the generation before Victor can have Ρreachedas these say? Why are they not ashamed of so calumniating Victor when they know quite well that Victor excommunicated Theodotus the cobbler, the founder and father of this insurrection which denie God, when he nrst said that Christ was a mere man? For if Victor was so minded towards them as their blasphemy teaches, how could he have thrown out Theodotus who invented this heresy?” Such werethe events ofthe time of Victor.
 When he had held hisofficeten yearS, Zephyrinus WaS appointed his suceessor in the ninth year of the reign οf Severus.
 1 Αnd the author of the book mentioned about the founder of the above- mentioned heresy adds another incident which happened in the time of Zephyrinus and wTites as follows:
 “I will at least remind many of the brethren of an event whieh happened in our time whiehI think would have probably been a warning to the men of sodom had it happened in their city.
 There Wasa certain confessor, Natalius, not long ago but in our own time.
 Ηe was deceivedby Asclepiodotus andbyasecond Theodotus,a banker.
 These were both ffiscipleS of Theodotus the cobbler, who was firstexcommunicated by vietor, who, as I said, was then bishop, for thisway ἔφην, τοῦ τότε ἐπισκόπου.
 ἀνεπείσθη δὲ ὁ Νατάλιος ὑπ’ αὐτῶν ἐπὶ σαλαρίῳ ἐπίσκοπος κληθῆναι ταύτης τῆς αἱρέσεως, ὥστε λαμβάνειν παρ’ αὐτῶν μηνιαῖα δηνάρια ρν'.
 γενόμενος οὖν σὺν αὐτοῖς, δι’ ὁραμάτων πολλάκις ἐνουθετεῖτο ὑπὸ τοῦ κυρίου·
 ὁ γὰρ εὔσπλαγχνος θεὸς καὶ κύριος ἡμῶν Ἰησοῦς Χριστὸς οὐκ ἐβούλετο ἔξω ἐκκλησίας γενόμενον ἀπολέσθαι μάρτυρα τῶν ἰδίων παθῶν.
 ἐπεὶ δὲ ῥᾳθυμότερον τοῖς ὁράμασιν προσεῖχεν, δελεαζόμενος τῆ τε παρ’ αὐτοῖς πρωτοκαθεδρίᾳ καὶ τῇ πλείστους ἀπολλυούσῃ αἰσχροκερδίᾳ, τελευταῖον ὑπὸ ἁγίων ἀγγέλων ἐμαστιγώθη δι’ ὅλης τῆς νυκτὸς οὐ μικρῶς αἰκισθείς, ὥστε ἕωθεν ἀναστῆναι καὶ ἐνδυσάμενον σάκκον καὶ ἄποδόν καταπασάμενον μετὰ πολλῆς σπουδῆς καὶ δακρύων προσπεσεῖν Ζεφυρίνῳ τῷ ἐπισκόπῳ, κυλιόμενον ὑπὸ τοὺς πόδας οὐ μόνον τῶν ἐν κλήρῳ, ἀλλὰ καὶ τῶν λαικῶν, συγχέαι τε τοῖς δάκρυσιν τὴν εὔσπλαγχνον ἐκκλησίαν τοῦ ἐλεήμονος χριστοῦ πολλῇ τε τῆ δεήσει χρησάμενον δείξαντά τε τοὺς μώλωπας ὧν εἰλήφει πληγῶν μόλις κοινωνηθῆναι.
” Tούτοις ἐπισυνάψομεν καὶ ἄλλας περὶ τῶν αὐτῶν τοῦ αὐτοῦ συγγραφέως φωνάς, τοῦτον ἐχούσας τὸν τρόπον·
 “ γραφὰς μὲν θείας ἀφόβως ῥερᾳδιουργήκασιν, πίστεώς τε ἀρχαίας κανόνα ἠθετήκασιν, Χριστὸν δὲ ἠγνοήκασιν, οὐ τί αἱ θεῖαι λέγουσιν γραφαί, ζητοῦντες, ἀλλ’ ὁποῖον σχῆμα συλλογισμοῦ εἰς τὴν τῆς ἀθεότητος σύστασιν εὑρεθῇ, φιλοπόνως ἀσκοῦντες.
 κἂν αὐτοῖς προτείνῃ τις ῥητὸν γραφῆς θεικῆς, ἐξετάζουσιν πό-of thinking, or rather of not thinking.
 Natalius was persuaded by them to be called bishop of this heresy witha salary,so that he was paida hundred and Rfty denariia month by them.
 1 When he was with themhewas οften warned by the Lord in visions, for οur merciful Ood and Lord, Jesus ChriSt, did not with that there should go out of the church and perish one who had beena vitness οf his own sufferings.
 2 But when he paid indifferent artention to the visions, for he Was entrapped by hiS leading rank among them and by that covetousness which ruins so many, he was at last scourged all night long by holy angels, and suffered nota little,so that in the morning he got up, puton sackcloth, and covered himseR with ashes, and went with much haste, and fell down with tears before Ζephyrinus the bishop, rolling atthe feet not onlyofthe elergy but alsoofthe laity,and moved vith his tears the compassionate church οf the merciful Christ.
 But for all hiS prayers and the exhibition of the wealS ofthe stripes hehad received,he was searcely admitted into communion.
” We wouldadd to this someother Words ofthe same authoronthe same persons, Which run as follows:
“ They have not feared to corrupt divine scriptures, they have nullified the rule of ancient faith, they havenot known Christ, they donot inquire whatthedivinescriptures say, but in- dustriously consider what syllogistic Bguremaybe found forthe support of their atheiSm.
 Ιf anyone adduced to thema text of divine Scripture they τερον συνημένον ἢ διεχευγμένον δύναται ποιῆσαι σχῆμα συλλογισμοῦ·
 καταλιπόντες δὲ τὰς ἁγίας τοῦ θεοῦ γραφάς, γεωμετρίαν ἐπιτηδεύουσιν, ὡς ἂν ἐκ τῆς γῆς ὄντες καὶ ἐκ τῆς γῆς λαλοῦντες καὶ τὸν ἄνωθεν ἐρχόμενον ἀγνοοῦντες.
 Εὐκλείδης γοῦν παρά τισιν αὐτῶν φιλοπόνως θαυμάζονται·
 Ἀριστοτέλης δὲ καὶ Θεόφραστος θαυμάζονται·
 Γαληνὸς γὰρ ἴσως ὑπό τινων καὶ προσκυνεῖται.
 οἱ δὲ ταῖς τῶν ἀπίστων τέχναις εἰς τὴν τῆς αἱρέσεως αὐτῶν γνώμην ἀποχρώμενοι καὶ τῇ τῶν ἀθέων πανουργίᾳ τὴν ἁπλῆν τῶν θείων γραφῶν πίστιν καπηλεύοτες, ὅτι μηδὲ ἐγγὺς πίστεως ὑπάρχουσιν, τί δεῖ καὶ λέγειν;
 διὰ τοῦτο ταῖς θείαις γραφαῖς ἀφόβως ἐπέβαλον τὰς χεῖρας, λέγοντες αὐτὰς διωρθωκέναι.
 καὶ ὅτι τοῦτο μὴ καταψευδόμενος αὐτῶν λέγω, ὁ βουλόμενος δύναται μαθεῖν.
 εἰ γάρ τις θελήσει συγκομίσας αὐτῶν ἑκάστου τὰ ἀντίγραφα ἐξ·
 ἐτάζειν πρὸς ἄλληλα, κατὰ πολὺ ἂν εὕροι διαφωνοῦντα.
 ἀσύμφωνα γοῦν ἔσται τὰ Ἀσκληπιάδου τοῖς Θεοδότου, πολλῶν δὲ ἔστιν εύπορῆσαι διὰ τὸ φιλοτίμως ἐκγεγράφθαι τοὺς μαθητὰς αὐτῶν τὰ ὑφ’ ἑκάστου αὐτῶν, ὡς αὐτοὶ καλοῦσιν, κατωρθωμένα, τοῦτ’ ἐστὶν ἠφανισμένα·
 πάλιν δὲ τούτοις τὰ Ἑρμοφίλου οὐ συνᾴδει.
 τὰ γὰρ Απολλωνιάδου οὐδὲ αὐτὰ ἑαυτοῖς ἐστιν σύμφωνα·
 ἔνεστιν γὰρ συγκρῖναι τὰ πρότερον ὑπ’ αὐτῶν κατασκευασθέντα τοῖς ὕστερον πάλιν ἐπιδιαστρα- inquire whetherit can be put in the form ofa conjunctive oradisjunctive syllogism.
 They abandon the holy scripture of Godand Study geometry, 1 for they are of the earth and they speak of the earth and ffihlm who comes from above they do not know.
 Some οf them, forsooth, study the geometry οf Euclid and admire Αristotle and Theophrastus.
 Galen perhaps is even worshipped by some of them.
 when they makea bad use of the arts of unbelievers ror the opinionsof their heresy, and adulteratethe simple faith of the divine seriptures by the cunningοf the godless, what need is there to say that they are not even near the faithf For this cause they ffid not fear to lay hands οn the divine scriptures, saying that they had eonected them.
 Αnd that 1 do not calumniate them in saying tffis anywhowish can learn, for if any be willing to collect and compare with each other the texts of each of them, he would hnd them in great discord, for the copies 3 of Asclepiades do not agree vith those of Theodotus, and it is possible to obtain many of them because their disciples have diligently wTitten out copies corrected, as they say, but really corrupted by each of them.
 Again the eopies of Hermophilus do notagree with these, the copies οf ΑΡolloniadesarenot evenconsistentwith themselves, for the eopies copies by them at Rrst can be compared With those whieh later on underwent a second corruption, and they φεῖσιν καὶ εὑρεῖν κατὰ πολὺ ἀπᾴδοντα.
 ὅσης δὲ τόλμης ἐστὶ τοῦτο τὸ ἁμάρτημα, εἰκὸς μηδὲ ἐκείνους ἀγνοεῖν.
 ἢ γὰρ οὐ πιστεύουσιν ἁγίῳ πνεύματι λελέχθαι τὰς θείας γραφάς, καί εἰσιν ἀπιστοι·
 ἢ ἑαυτοὺς ἡγοῦνται σοφωτέρους τοῦ ἁγίου πνεύματος ὑπάρχειν, καὶ τί ἕτερον ἢ δαιμονῶσιν;
 οὐδὲ γὰρ ἀρνήσασθαι δύνανται ἑαυτῶν εἶναι τὸ τόλμημα, ὁπόταν καὶ τῆ αὐτῶν χειρὶ ἧ γεγραμμένα, καὶ παρ’ ὧν κατηχήθησαν, μὴ τοιαύτας παρέλαβον τὰς γραφάς, καὶ δεῖξαι ἀντίγραφα ὅθεν αὐτὰ μετεγράψαντο, μὴ ἔχωσιν.
 ἔνιοι δ’ αὐτῶν οὐδὲ παραχαράσσειν ἠξίωσαν αὐτάς, ἀλλ’ ἁπλῶς ἀρνησάμενοι τόν τε νόμον καὶ τοὺς προφήτας, ἀνόμου καὶ ἀθέου διδασκαλίας προφάσει χάριτος εἰς ἔσχατον ἀπωλείας ὄλεθρον κατωλίσθησαν.
” Καὶ ταῦτα μὲν τοῦτον ἱστορήσθω τὸν τρόπον.
 will be found to disagree greatly.
 The impudence of this sin can careely be unknown evento them, for either they do not believe that rile diVine scriptures were spoken by the Holy Spirit, and if so they are unbelievers, or they think that they are wiser than the Ηoly spirit, and what are they but demoniacs? For they cannot even deny that this crime is theirs, seeing that the copies were Written in their own hand, and they did not receive the seriptures in thiS eondition from their teachers, nor can they show originals from whieh they made their copies.
 some of them have not thOught it neeessary even to emendthe text, but simply deny the LaW and the Prophets, and thuS on the pretence1 of theirWieked and godleSs teaching have fallen to the lowest destruction of” Αnd let this suffice for these things.
 THE ECCLESIASTICAL HISTORY ΟF EUSEBIUS ζݲ Τάδε καὶ ἢ ςݲ περιέχει βίβλος τῆς ἱστορίαςĀ Περὶ τοῦ κατὰ Σευῆρον διωγμοῦ.
 Βݲ Περὶ τῆς Ὠριγένους ἐκ παιδὸς ἀσκήσεως.
 Γݲ Ὡς κομιδῇ νέος ὢν τὸν χριστοῦ ἐπρέσβευεν.
 Δݲ ὅσοι δι’ αὐτοῦ κατηχηθέντες μάρτυρες.
 Εݲ Περὶ Ποταμιαίνης.
 ςݲ Περὶ Κλήμεντος τοῦ Ἀλεξανδρέως.
 Ζݲ Περὶ Ἰούδα συγγραφέως.
 Ηݲ Περὶ τοῦ τολμηθέντος Ὠριγένει.
 Θݲ Περὶ τῶν κατὰ Νάρκισσον παραδόξων.
 Iݲ Περὶ τῶν ἐν Ἱεροσολύμοις ἐπισκόπων.
 ΙݲΑݲ Περὶ Ἀλεξάνδρου.
 ΙݲBݲ Περὶ Σεραπίωνος καὶ τῶν φερομένων αὐτοῦ λόγων.
 ΙݲΓݲ Περὶ τῶν Κλήμεντος συγγραμμάτων.
 ΙݲΔݲ‘ Oπόαων ἐμνημόνευσε γραφῶν.
 ΙݲEݲ Περὶ Ἡρακλᾶ.
 Ιݲςݲ ὅπως Ὠριγένης περὶ τὰς θείας γραφὰς ἐσπουδάκει.
 CONTENTS ΟF BOOK VI The Sixth Bookof the Ecclesiastical History contains the following:
 I.
 On the persecutionunder Severus.
 II.
 Οn Οrigen’s training from boyhood.
 ΙII.
 How he set forth the word of Christ when quite young.
 IV.
 How many of those insructed by him were elevated to the rank of martyrs.
 V.
 Οn Potamiaena.
 VI.
 On Clement the Alexandrian.
 VII.
 Οn Judas,a writer.
 VIII.
 On Origen's rash act.
 IX.
 On the miraelesof Narcissus.
 X.
 On the bishops at Jerusalem.
 XI.
 Οn Alexander.
 XII.
 Οn Serapion andhis extant works.
 XIII.
 On the treatisesOf Clement.
 XIV.
 What Scriptures he mentioned.
 XV.
 Οn Heraclas.
 XVI.
 How Origen laboured at the divine Scriptures.
 IݲZݲ Περὶ Συμμάχου τοῦ ἑρμηνέως.
 ΙݲΗݲ Περὶ Ἀμβροσίου.
 ΙݲΘݲ Ὅσα περὶ Ὠριγένους μνημονεύεται.
 Κݲ Ὅσοι τῶν τηνικάδε φέρονται λόγοι.
 KݲAݲ Ὅσοι κατὰ τούσδε ἐπίσκοποι ἐγνωρίζοντο.
 ΚݲΒݲ Ὅσοι τῶν Ἱππολύτου εἰς ἡμᾶς ἦλθεν.
 ΚݲΓݲ Περὶ τῆς Ὠριγένους απουδὴς καὶ ὡς τοῦ ἐκκλησιατικοῦ πρεσβείου ἠξιώθη.
 ΚݲΔݲ Τίνα ἐπὶ τῆς Ἀλεξανδρείας ἐξηγήσατο.
 ΚݲΕݲ Ὅπως τῶν ἐνδιαθήκων γραφῶν ἐμηνημόνευσεν.
 Κݲςݲ Ὅπως αὐτὸν ἑώρων οἱ ἐπίσκοποι.
 ΚݲΖݲ Ὡς Ἡρακλᾶς τὴν Ἀλεξανδρέων ἐπισκοπὴν διεδέξατο.
 ΚݲΗݲ Περὶ τοῦ κατὰ Μαξιμῖνον διωγμοῦ.
 ΚݲΘݲ Περὶ Φαβιανοῦ ὡς ῾Ρωμαίων ἐπίσκοπος ἐκ θεοῦ παραδόξως ἀνεδείχθη.
 Λݲ Ὅσοι γεγόνασιν Ὠριγένους φοιτηταί.
 ΛݲΑݲ Περὶ Ἀφρικανοῦ.
 ΛݲΒݲ Τίνα Ὠριγένης ἐν Καισαπείᾳ τῆς Παλαιστίνης ἐξηγήσατο.
 ΛݲΓݲ Περὶ τῆς βηρύλλου παρατροπῆς.
 ῥοπῆς.
 ΛݲΔݲ Τὰ κατὰ Φίλιππον.
 ΛݲΕݲ Ὡς Διονύσιος Ἡρακλᾶ τὴν ἐπισκοπὴν διεδέξατο.
 Λݲςݲ Ὅσα ἄλλα ἐσπούδαστο τῷ Ὠριγένει.
 XVII.
 Οn symmaehus the translator.
 XVIII.
 Οn Αmbrose.
 XIX.
 What things are mentioned concerning Origen.
 XX.
 What books ofthe mcn of that day are extant.
 XXI.
 What bishops were well known in the time of these persons.
 XXII.
 What works of Hippolytus have reached us.
 XXIII.
 Οn Origen's zeal, and how he was deemed worthy of the presbyterate in the Church.
 XXIV.
 The commentaries he wrote at Alexandria.
 XXV.
 Ηow he mentioned the Canonical Scriptures.
 XXVI.
 Ηow the bishops regarded him.
 XXVII.
 Ηow Ηeraelas succeeded to the episcopate of the Alexandrians.
 XXVIII.
 Οn the persecutionunder Maximin.
 XXIX.
 Οn Fabian, how he was miraculously designated bishop of the Romansby God.
 XXX.
 What pupils of Origen there have been.
 XXXI.
 On Africanus.
 XXXII.
 The commentaries that Origen wrote at Caesarea in Ρalertine.
 XXXIII.
 Οn the error or Beryllus.
 XXXIV.
 What happened under Philopl.
 XXXV.
 How Dionysius succeeded Ηeraclas in the episcopate.
 XXXVI.
 Οther works composed by Οrigen.
 ΛݲΖݲ Περὶ τῆς τῶν Ἀράβων διαστάσεως.
 ΛݲΗݲ Περὶ τῆς Ἑλκεσαιτῶν αἱρέσεως.
 ΛݲΘݲ Περὶ τῶν κατὰ Δέκιον.
 Mݲ Περὶ τῶν Διονυσίῳ συμβάντων.
 ΜݲΑݲ Περὶ τῶν ἐπ’ αὐτῆς Ἀλεξανδρείας μαρτυρησάντων.
 ΜݲBݲ Περὶ ὧν ἄλλων ὁ Διονύσιος ἱστορεῖ.
 ΜݲΓݲ Περὶ Νοουάτου, οἷός τις ἢν τὸν τρόπον, καὶ περὶ τῆς κατ’ αὐτὸν αἱρέσεως.
 ΜݲΔݲ Περὶ Σεραπίωνος ἱστορία Διονυσίου.
 ΜݲΕݲ Ἐπιστολὴ πρὸς Νοουᾶτον Διονυσίου.
 Μݲςݲ Περὶ τῶν ἄλλων Διονθσίου ἐπιστολῶν.
 XXXVII.
 Οn the dissension of the Arabians.
 XXXVIII.
 Οn the heresy of the Helkesaites.
 XXIX.
 Οn what happenedunder Decius.
 XL.
 Οn what befell Dionysius.
 XLI.
 On those that suffered martyrdom Alexandira itself.
 XLII.
 On the other martyrdoms which Dionysius relates.
 XLIII.
 Οn Novatus, his mannerof life, and his heresy.
 XLIV.
 Α story of Dionysius about Serapion.
 XLV.
 Letter of Dionysius to Novatus.
 XLVI.
 Οn the other letters of Dionysius.
 ΥΣΗBΙΟΥ ΛΗΣΙΑΣTΙKΗΣ ΙΣTOΡΙΑΣ ς I.
 Ὡς δὲ καὶ Σευῆρος διωγμὸν κατὰ τῶν ἐκκλσιῶν κλησιῶν ἐκίνει, λαμπρὰ μὲν τῶν ὑπὲρ εὐσεβείας ἀθλητῶν κατὰ πάντα τόπον ἀπετελεῖτο μαρτύρια, μάλισταδ’ ἐπλήθυεν ἐπ’ Ἀλεξανδρείας, τῶν ἀπ’ Αἰγύπτου καὶ Θηβαίδος ἁπάσης αὐτόθι ὥσπερ μέγιστον ἀθλητῶν θεοῦ παραπεμπομένων στάδιον διὰ καρτερικωτάτης τε ποικίλων βασάνων καὶ θανάτου τρόπων ὑπομονῆς τοὺς παρὰ θεῷ στεφάνους ἀναδουμένων·
 ἐν οἷς καὶ Λεωνίδης, λεγόμενος Ὠριγένους πατήρ, τὴν κεφαλὴν ἀποτμηθείς, νέον κομιδῆ καταλείπει τὸν παῖδα·
 ὃς δὴ ὁποίας ἐξ ἐκείνου περὶ τὸν θεῖον λόγον προαιρέσεως ἦν, οὐκ ἄκαιρον διὰ βραχέων διελθεῖν τῷ μάΛιστα πολὺν εἶναι παρὰ τοῖς πολλοῖς τὸν περὶ αὐτοῦ βεβοημένον λόγον.
 ΙΙ.
 πολλὰ οὖν ἄν τις εἴποι τὸν βίον τοῦ ἀνδρὸς ἐν σχολῇ παραδοῦναι διὰ γραφῆς πειρώμενος, δέοιτοδ’ ἂν καὶ ἰδίας ὑποθέσεως ἡ περὶ αὐτοῦ σύνταξις·
 ὅμως δ’ ἡμεῖς ἐπὶ τοῦ παρόντος ἐπιτεμόμενοι τὰ πλεῖστα διὰ βραχέων ὡς οἷόν τε, ὀλίγα ἄττα τῶν THΕ ECCLESIASTICAL ΙSTΟRV ΟF EUSEBIUS BΟΟΚ VII1.
 Νow when Severus also was stirring up persecution againstthe churches, in every place splendid martyrdoms of the championsof piety were accomplished, but with especial frequency at Alexandria.
 Thither, as to some great arena, were escorted from Εgypt and the whole Thebais God's champions, who, through their most stedfast endurance in divers tortures and modes of death, were wreathed with the crowns laid up with God.
 Αmong these was Leonides, known as“the fatherof Οrigen,’ ’who was beheaded, leaving his son behind him quite young.
 It will not beout of placetodeseribe briefly how deliberately the mind was set on the Divine Word from that early age, especially as the story abouthim has received exceedingly widespread notoriety.
 II.
 Μany indeed, would therebe to say,if one were to attempt at leisure to hand down in writing the man's life, and the narrative concerning him would require alsoa work of its own.
 Nevertheless, on the present occasion abridging most things as briefly asmay be, we shall state some few of the facts concerning him, περὶ αὐτὸν διελευσόμεθα, ἔκ τινων ἐπιστολῶν καὶ ἱστορίας τῶν καὶ εἰς ἡμᾶς τῷ βίῳ πεφυλαγμένων αὐτοῦ γνωρίμων τὰ δηλούμενα φέροντες.
 Ὠριγένους καὶ τὰ ἐξ αὐτῶν ὡς εἰπεῖν σπαργάνων ἀξιομνημόνευτά μοι εἶναι δοκεῖ.
 δέκατον μὲν γὰρ ἐπεῖχε Σευῆρος τῆς βασιλείας ἔτος, ἡγεῖτο δὲ Ἀλεξανδρείας καὶ τῆς λοιπῆς Αἰγύπτου Λαῖτος, τῶν δ᾿ αὐτόθι παροικιῶν τὴν ἐπισκοπὴν νεωατὶ τότε μετὰ Ἰουλιανὸν Δημήτριος ὑπειλήφει.
 εἰς μέγα δὴ οὖν τῆς τοῦ διωγμοῦ πυρκαϊᾶς ἁφθείσης καὶ μυρίων ὅσων τοῖς κατὰ τὸ μαρτύριον ἀναδουμένων στεφάνοις, ἔρως τοσοῦτος μαρτυρίου τὴν Ὠριγένους, ἔτι κομιδῆ παιδὸς ὑπάρχοντος, κατφυχήν, ὡς ὁμόσε τοῖς κινδύνοις χωρεῖν προπηδᾶν τε καὶ ὁρμᾶν ἐπὶ τὸν ἀγῶνα προθύμως ἔχειν.
 ἤδη γέ τοι αμικρὸν δάον αὐτῷ καὶ τὰ τῆς ἀπὸ τοῦ βίου ἀπαλλαγῆς οὐ πόρρω καθίστατο, μὴ οὐχὶ τῆς θείας καὶ οὐρανίου προνοίας εἰς τὴν πλείατων ὠφέλειαν διὰ τῆς αὐτοῦ μητρὸς ἐμποδὼν αὐτῷ τῆς προθυμίας ἐνστάσης.
 αὕτη γοῦν τὰ μὲν πρῶτα λόγοις ἱκετεύουσα, τῆς περὶ αὐτὸν μητρικῆς διαθέσεως φειδὼ λαβεῖν παρεκάλει, αφοδρότερον δ᾿ ἐπιτείναντα θεασαμένη, ὅτε γνοὺς ἁλόντα τὸν πατέρα δεαμωτηρίῳ φυλάττεσθαι ὅλος ἐγίνετο τῆς περὶ τὸ μαρτύριον ὁρμῆς, τὴν πᾶσαν αὐτοῦ ἀποκρυφαμένη ἐσθῆτα οἴκοι μένειν ἀνάγκην ἐπῆγεν·
 ὃ δ᾿, ὡς οὐδὲν ἄλλο πράττειν αὐτῷ παρῆν, τῆς προθυμίας ὑπὲρ τὴν ἡλικίαν ἐπιτεινομένης οὐχ οἷός τε ὢν ἠρεμεῖν, διαπέμπεται τῷ πατρὶ πρὸτρεπτικωτάτην περὶ μαρτυρίου ἐπιστολήν, ἐν ᾗ κατὰ λέξιν αὐτῷ παραινεῖ λέγων“ ἔπεχε μὴ δι’ gathering what we set forth from certain letters and information derived from pupils of his, whose lives have been preserved even to our day.
 In the caseof OrigenI think that even the facts from his very cradle,1so to speak,are worthy mention.
 For Severus was in the tenth yearof his reigh, 2 and Laetus was governor of Alexandria the rest of Εgypt, and Demetrius had just then received the episcopate οf the communities there in succession to Julian.
 When, therefore, the flame οf persecution was kindled toa fierce blaze, and countless numbers were being wreathed with the crowns οf martyrdom, Origen's soul was with such a passion for martyrdom, while he was stillquitea boy, that he was all eagerness to come to close quarters with danger, and to leap forward and rush into the conflict.
 In fact, it were but a very little step and the end of his lifewas at hand,hadnot the divineandheavenly providence, acting for the general good through his mother, stood inthe way of his zeal.
 She, at all events, at firsthad recoursetoverbal entreaties, bidding him spare a mother's feelings;
 then, when he learnt that his fatherhad been captured and was kept in prison, and his whole being was set on the desire for martyrdom, perceiving that his purpose was more resolute than ever, she hidall his clothes, and solaid upon himthenecessity of remainingat home.
 Αnd since nothing else remained for him to do, and a zeal, intense beyond his years, suffered him not to be quiet, he sent to his fathera letter on martyrdom most strongly urging him οn,in which he advises him in these very words, saying:
“ Take care to to change ἡμᾶς ἄλλο τι φρονήσῃς.
 ” τοῦτο πρῶτον τῆς Ὠριγένους παιδικῆς ἀγχινοίας καὶ περὶ τὴν θεοσέβειαν γνησιωτάτης διαθέσεως ἀνάγραπτον ἔστω τεκμήριον.
 καὶ γὰρ ἤδη καὶ τῶν τῆς πίστεως λόγων οὐ σμικρὰς ἀφορμὰς καταβέβλητο, ταῖς θείαις γραφαῖς ἐξ ἔτι παιδὸς καταβέβλητο, οὐ μετρίως γοῦν καὶ περὶ ταύτας πεπόνητο, τοῦ πατρὸς αὐτῷ πρὸς τῇ τῶν ἐγκυκλίων παιδείᾳ καὶ τούτων οὐ κατὰ πάρεργον τὴν φροντίδα πεποιημένου.
 ἐξ ἅπαντος γοῦν αὐτὸν πρὸ τῆς τῶν Ἑλληνικῶν μαθημάτων μελέτης ἐνῆγεν τοῖς ἱεροῖς ἐνασκεῖσθαι παιδεύμααιν, ἐκμαθήσεις καὶ ἀπαγγελίας ἡμέρας ἑκάατης αὐτὸν εἰαπραττόμενος·
 οὐκ ἀπροαιρέτως δὲ ταῦτ᾿ ἐγίνετο τῷ παιδί, ἀλλὰ καὶ ἄγαν προθυμότατα περὶ ταῦτα πονοῦντι, ὡς μηδ᾿ ἐξαρκεῖν αὐτῷ τὰς ἁπλᾶς καὶ προχείρους τῶν ἱερῶν λόγων ἐντεύξεις, ζητεῖν δέ τι πλέον καὶ βαθυτέρας ἤδη ἐξ ἐκείνου πολυπραγμονεῖν θεωρίας, ὥστε καὶ πράγματα παρέχειν τῷ πατρί, τί ἄρα ἐθέλοι δηλοῦν τὸ τῆς θεοπνεύστου γραφῆς ἀναπυνθανόμενος βούλημα.
 ἐκεῖνος δὲ τῷ μὲν δοκεῖν εἰς πρόσωπον ἐπέπληττεν αὐτῷ, μηδὲν ὑπὲρ ἡλικίαν μηδὲ τῆς προφανοῦς διανοίας περαιτέρω τι ζητεῖν παραινῶν, ἰδίως δὲ παρ’ ἑαυτῷ τὰ μεγάλα γεγηθὼς τὴν μεγίατην ὡμολόγει τῷ πάντων ἀγαθῶν αἰτίῳ θεῷ χάριν, ὅτι δὴ αὐτὸν τοιοῦδε πατέρα γενέσθαι παιδὸς ἠξίωσεν.
 ἐπιστάντα δὲ ἤδη πολλάκις καθεύδοντι τῷ παιδὶ γυμνῶααι μὲν αὐτοῦ τὰ ατέρνα φασίν, ὥαπερ δὲ θείου πνεύματος ἔνδον ἐν αὐτοῖς ἀφιερωμένου, φιλῆσαί τε σεβασμίως καὶ τῆς εὐτεκνίας μακάριον thy mind on account. ’
’ Let this be recorded as the first proofof Origen 's boyish readiness of mind and genuine love of godliness.
 For indeed in the study of the faith also he had already laid downa good foundation, having been trained in the divine Scriptures from the from the time that he was stilla boy.
 Certainly it was no ordinary amount of labour that he bestowed on these,since his father, in addition to the customary curriculum, took pains that these also should be for him no secondary matter.
 On all occasions, for example, he kept urging him before beginning his secular1 lessons to train himself in the sacred studies, exacting from him each day learning by heart and repetition.
 Αnd this the boy did with nolackof willingness, nay, he worked with even excessive zeal at these studies,so that he was not satisfied with reading the sacred words ina simple and literal manner, but sought something further,and busied himself, even at that age, with deeper speculations, troubling his father by his questions as to what could be the inner meaning of the inspired Scripture.
 Αnd his father would rebuke him ostensiblyto his face, counselling himto seek nothing beyond his years nor anything further than the manifest meaning;
 but secretly in himself he rejoiced greatly, and gave profound thanksto God,the Αuthor ofall good things, that Ηehaddeemed him worthytobe the fatherof sucha boy.
 Αnd it is said that manya time he would stand over the sleeping boy and uncover his breast, as ifa divine spirit were enshrined therein, and kissing it with reverence count himself happy in his goodly offspring.
 ἑαυτὸν ἡγήσασθαι.
 ταῦτα καὶ ἕτερα τούτοις συγγενῆ περὶ παῖδα ὄντα τὸν Ὠριγένην γενέσθαι μνημονευουσιν.
 Ὡς δὲ ἤδη αὐτῷ ὁ πατὴρ μαρτυρίῳ τετελείωτο, ἔρημος ἅμα μητρὶ καὶ βραχυτέροις ἀδελφοῖς τὸν ἀριθμὸν ἕξ, ἑπτακαιδέκατον οὐ πλῆρες ἔτος ἄγων, καταλείπεται·
 τῆς γε μὴν τοῦ πατρὸς περιουσίας τοῖς βασιλικοῖς ταμείοις ἀναΛηφθείσης, ἐν σπάνει τῶν κατὰ τὸν βίον χρειῶν σὺν τοῖς καταστάς, οἰκονομίας τῆς ἐκ θεοῦ καταξιοῦται καὶ τυγχάνει δεξιώσεως ὁμοῦ καὶ καταξιοῦται παρά τινι πλουσιωτάτη μὲν τὸν βίον καὶ τὰ ὤα περιφανεστάτῃ γυναικί, διαβόητόν γε μὴν ἄνδρα περιεπούσῃ τῶν τότε ἐπὶ τῆς Ἀλεξανδρείας αἱρεσιωτῶν·
 τὸ γένος ἢν οὗτος Ἀντιοχεύς, θετὸν δ’ υἱὸν αὐτὸν εἶχέν τε σὺν ἑαυτῇ καὶ ἐν τοῖς μάλιστα περιεῖπεν ἡ δεδηλωμένη.
 ἀλλὰ τούτῳ γε ἐπάναγκες ὁ Ὠριγένης συνών, τῆς ἐξ ἐκείνου τὴν πίστιν ὀρθοδοξίας ἐναργῆ παρείχετο δείγματα, ὅτι δὴ μυρίου πλήθους διὰ τὸ δοκοῦν ἱκανὸν ἐν λόγῳ τοῦ Παύλου( τοῦτο γὰρ ἢν ὄνομα τῷ ἀνδρί) συναγομένου παρ’ αὐτῷ οὐ μόνον αἱρετικῶν, ἀλλὰ καὶ ἡμετέρων, οὐδεπώποτε προυτράπη κατὰ τὴν εὐχὴν αὐτῷ συστῆναι, φυλάττων ἐξ ἔτι παιδὸς κανόνα ἐκκΛησίας βδελυττόμενός τε, ὡς αὐτῷ ῥήματί φησίν που αὐτός, τὰς τῶν αἱρέσεων διδασκαλίας.
 προαχθεὶς δ’ ὑπὸ τοῦ πατρὸς ἐν τοῖς Ἑλλήνων μαθήμασιν ἐκθυμότερόν τε καὶ μετὰ τὴν ἐκείνου τελευτὴν τῇ περὶ τοὺς λόγους ἀσκήσει ὅλον ἐπιδοὺς ἑαυτόν, ὡς καὶ παρασκευὴν ἐπὶ τὰ γραμματικὰ μετρίαν ἔχειν, μετ’ οὐ πολὺ τῆς τοῦ πατρὸς τελειώσεως, τούτοις ἐπιδεδωκὼς ἑαυτόν, These are the stories, and others akin to these, that they tell about Origen's boyhood.
 But when his father had been perfectedby martyrdom,he was left destitute with his mother and six smaller brothers, when he was not quite seventeen.
 His father 's property was confiscated forthe imperial treasury, and he found himself, along with his ralatives, in want of the necessaries of life.
 Yet he was deemed worthy of divine aid, and met with welcome and refreshment froma certain lady, very richin this world's goods,and otherwise distinguished, who nevertheless was treating with honoura wellknown person, one of the heretics at Alexandria at that timeΗewas anAntiocheneby race, but the lady we have mentioned kept him at her house as her adopted son, and treatedhim with especial honour.
 But although Origen of necessity had to consortwith him, he used to give clear proofs of his orthodoxy, at that age, in the faith.
 For though very great numbers, not onlyof heretics but also of our own people, were gathered together with Ρaul( for that was the man 's name), attracted by his apparent skilfulness in speech, Origen could never be persuaded to associate with him in prayer, keeping the rule οf the Church, even from boyhood, and “ loathing’’— the very wordhe himself uses somewhere— teachings of the heresies.
 Ηis father had brought him forwardin secular studies, and after his death he applied himself wholly with renewed zeal toa literary training, so that he hada tolerable amount οf pronciency in letters;
 and, not not after his father's perfecting,by dint of application to these εὐπόρει τῶν ἀναγκαίων, ὡς ἐν ἐκείνῃ τῇ ἡλικίᾳ, δαψιλῶς.
 ΙIΙ.
 Σχολάζοντι δὲ τῇ διατριβῇ, ὥς που καὶ αὐτὸς ἐγγράφως ἱστορεῖ, μηδενός τε ἐπὶ τῆς Ἀλεξανδρείας τῷ κατηχεῖν ἀνακειμένου, πάντωνδ’ ἀπεληλαμένων ὑπὸ τῆς ἀπειλῆς τοῦ διωγμοῦ, προσῄεσαν αὐτῷ τινες ἀπὸ τῶν ἐθνῶν τὸν λόγον τοῦ θεοῦ·
 ὧν πρῶτον ἐπισημαίνεται γεγονέναι Πλούταρχον, ὃς μετὰ τὸ βιῶναι καλῶς καὶ μαρτυρίῳ θείῳ κατεκοσμήθη, δεύτερον Ἡρακλᾶν, τοῦ Πλουτάρχου ἀδελφόν, ὃς δὴ καὶ αὐτὸς παρ’ αὐτῷ πλείστην βίου φιλοσόφου καὶ ἀσκήσεως ἀπόδειξιν παρασχών, τῆς Ἀλεξανδρέων μετὰ Δημήτριον ἐπισκοπῆς ἀξιοῦται.
 ἔτος δ’ ἦγεν ὀκτωκαιδέκατον καθ’δ’ τοῦ τῆς κατηχήσεως προέστη διδασκαλείου·
 ἐν ᾧ καὶ προκόπτει ἐπὶ τῶν κατὰ Ἀκύλαν τῆς Ἀλεξανδρείας ἡγούμενον διωγμῶν, ὅτε καὶ μάλιστα διαβόητον ἐκτήσατο παρὰ πᾶσιν τοῖς ἀπὸ τῆς πίστεως ὁρμωμένοις ὄνομα δι’ ἢν ἐνεδείκνυτο πρὸς ἅπαντας τοὺς ἁγίους ἀγνῶτάς τε καὶ γνωρίμους μάρτυρας δεξίωσίν τε καὶ προθυμίαν.
 οὐ μόνον γὰρ ἐν δεσμοῖς τυγχάνουσιν, οὐδὲ μέχρις ὑστάτης ἀποφάσεως ἀνακρινομένοις αὐνὴν, ἀλλὰ καὶ μετὰ ταύτην ἀπαγομένοις τὴν ἐπὶ θανάτῳ τοῖς ἁγίοις μάρτυσιν, πολλῇ τῇ παρρησίᾳ χρώμενος καὶ ὁμόσε τοῖς κινδύνοις χωρῶν·
 ὥστε ἤδη αὐτὸν προσιόντα θαρσαλέως καὶ τοὺς μάρτυρας μετὰ πολλῆς παρρησίας φιλήματι προσαγορεύοντα πολλάκις ἐπιμανεὶς ὁ ἐν κύκλῳ τῶν ἐθνῶν δῆμος μικροῦ δεῖν κατέλευσεν, εἰ μὴ τῆς θείας δεξιᾶς βοηθοῦ studies, hewas abundantly supplied, for a person of his years, with the necessaries of of life.
 III.
 Αnd while he was devoting himself to teaching, as he himself informs us somewherein writing, since there was no one at Alexandria set apart for catechetical instruction( for all had been driven away by the threat of the persecution), some of the heathen approached him to hear the word of God.
 Of these Plutrach is pointed out as being the first, who aftera noble life was adorned also with a divine martyrdom;
 and the second, Heraclas, Plutarch's brother.
 Ηe also, in hisown person, afforded a noteworthy example of a philosophic life and of discipline,and was deemed worthy of the bishopric of Αlexandrians in succession to Demetrius.
 Origen was in his eighteenth year1 when he came to preside over the catechetical school, and at this time also he came into prominence when the persecutions were going on under Aquila, the governor of Alexandria.
 2 Then also he won himself an exceedingly wide reputation among all those who were οf the faith, by the kindly help and goodwill that he displayed towards all the holy martyrs, unknown and known alike.
 For he was present not only with the holy martyrs who werein prison, not onlywiththose who were under examination right up tothe final sentence, but also when they were being led away afterwardsto their death, using great boldness and coming to close quarters with danger;
 so that,ashe courageously drew near and with great boldness greeted the martyrs witha kiss, many a time the heathen multitude round about in its fury went near to stoning him, but for the fact that time after time he found the divine right hand to help him, and so καθάπαξ τυγχάνων παραδόξως διεδίδρασκεν, ἡ δ’ αὐτὴ θεία καὶ οὐράνιος χάρις ἄλλοτε πάλιν καὶ πάλιν καὶ οὐδ’ ἔατιν ὁσάκις εἰπεῖν, τῆς ἄγαν περὶ τὸν Χριστοῦ λόγον προθυμίας τε καὶ παρρησίας ἕνεκεν τηνικαῦτα ἐπιβουλευόμενον αὐτὸν διεφύλαττεν.
 τοσοῦτος δ’ ἦν ἄρα τῶν ἀπίστων ὁ πρὸς αὐτὸν πόλεμος, ὡς καὶ συατροφὰς ποιησαμένους, στρατιώτας αὐτῷ περὶ τὸν οἶκον, ἔνθα κατέμενεν, ἐπιστῆσαι διὰ τὸ πλῆθος τῶν τὰ τῆς ἱερᾶς πίστεως κατηχουμένων παρ’ αὐτῷ.
 οὕτω δὲ ὁσημέραι ὁ κατ’ αὐτοῦ διωγμὸς ἐξεκάετο, ὡς μηκέτι χωρεῖν αὐτὸν τὴν πᾶσαν πόλιν, οἴκους μὲν ἐξ οἴκων ἀμείβοντα, πανταχόθεν δὲ ἐλαυνόμενον, τῆς πληθύος ἕνεκεν τῶν δι’ αὐτοῦ τῇ θείᾳ προσιόντων διδασκαλίᾳ·
 ἐπεὶ καὶ τὰ κατὰ πρᾶξιν ἔργα αὐτῷ γνηστωτάτης φιλοσοφίας κατορθώματα εὗ μάλα θαυμαστὰ περιεῖχεν(“ οἷον γοῦν τὸν λόγον, τοιόνοδε,” φασίν,“ τὸν τρόπον’’ καὶ“ οἷον τὸν τρόπον, τοιόνδε τὸν λόγον” ἐπεδείκνυτο), δι’ ἃ δὴ μάλιστα, συναιρομένης αὐτῷ δυνάμεως θείας, μυρίους ἐνῆγεν ἐπὶ τὸν αὐτοῦ ζῆλον.
 Ἐπειδὴ δὲ ἑώρα φοιτητὰς ἤδη πλείους προσιότας, αὐτῷ μόνῳ τῆς τοῦ κατηχεῖν διατριβῆς ὑπὸ Δημητρίου τοῦ τῆς ἐκκλησίας προεστῶτος ἐπιτετραμμένης, ἀσύμφωνον ἡγησάμενος τὴν τῶν γραμματικῶν λόγων διδασκαλίαν τῇ πρὸς τὰ θεῖα παιδεύματα ἀσκήσει, μὴ μελλήσας·
 ἀπορρήγνυσιν ἅτε ἀνωφελῆ καὶ τοῖς ἱεροῖς μαθήμασιν ἐναντίαν τὴν τῶν γραμματικῶν λόγων διατριβήν, εἶτα λογισμῷ καθήκοντι, ὡς ἂν μὴ γένοιτο τῆς παρ’ ἑτέρων ἐπικουρίας ἐνδεής, ὅσαπερ ἦν αὐτῷ πρότερον escaped marvellously;
 and this same divine and heavenly grace οn other occasions again and— it is impossibletosay how οften—Ρreserved him safely, when plots were laid against him at that timebecause of his excessiveΖeal and boldnessforthe word of Christ.
 Αnd so great, then,was the war of unbelievers against him, that soldiers were placed in groups for his protection1 round the house wherehe abode, because of the number of those who were receiving instruction from him in the sacred faith.
 Thus day by day the persecution againsthim blazed,so that there was no longer any place for him in the whole city;
 from house tohouse he passed, but was driven from all sides, on accountof the numberswho through him came οver to thedivine teaching.
 For in his practical conduct were to be foundtoa truly marvellous degree the right actions ofa most genuine philosophy( for — as the saying goes—“ as washis speech,so was the manner of life’’2 that he displayed, and“as his mannerof life,so his speech’’), and it was especially for this reason that, with the co- operation of the divine power, he brought so very to share his zeal.
 Αnd when he saw still more pupils coming to him( for the task of instruction had been entrusted by Demetrius, the presidentof the church, to him alone), considering that the teaching of letters3 was not consonant with training in the divine studies, without more ado he broke off the taskof teaching letters, 3 as being unprofitable and opposed to sacred study;
 and then, for the good reason that he might never be in need of others’ assistance,he disposedofall the τερον λόγων ἀρχαίων συγγράμματα φιλοκάλως ἐσπουδασμένα, μεταδούς, ὑπὸ τοῦ ταῦτα ἐωνημένου φερομένοις αὐτῷ τέτταρσιν ὀβολοῖς τῆς ἡμέρας ἠρκεῖτο.
 πλείστοις τε ἔτεσιν τοῦτον φιλοσοφῶν διετέλει τὸν τρόπον, πάσας ὕλας νεωτερικῶν ἐπιθυμιῶν ἑαυτοῦ περιαιρούμενος, καὶ διὰ πάσης μὲν ἡμέρας οὐ σμικροὺς ἀσκήσεως καμάτους ἀναπ<ιμπ>λῶν, καὶ τῆς νυκτὸς δὲ τὸν χρόνον ταῖς τῶν θείων γραφῶν ἑαυτὸν ἀνατιθεὶς μελέταις, βίῳ τε ὡς ἔνι μάλιστα ἐγκαρτερῶν φιλοσοφωτάτῳ, τοτὲ μὲν τοῖς ἐν ἀσιτίαις γυμνασίοις, τοτὲ δὲ μεμετρημένοις τοῖς κατὰ τὸν ὕπνον καιροῖς, οὗ μεταλαμβάνειν οὐδ’ ὅλως ἐπὶ στρωμνῆς, ἀλλ’ ἐπὶ τοὔδαφος διὰ σπουδῆς ἐποιεῖτο·
 πάντων δὲ μάλιστα τὰς εὐαγγελικὰς τοῦ σωτῆρος φωνὰς φυλακτέας ᾤετο εἶναι δεῖν τάς τε περὶ τοῦ μὴ δύο χιτῶνας μηδ’ ὑποδήμασιν Χρῆσθαι παρ’.
 αινούσας μηδὲ μὴν ταῖς περὶ τοῦ μέλλοντος χρόνου φροντίσιν κατατρίβεσθαι.
 ἀλλὰ καὶ μείζονι τῆς ἡλικίας προθυμίᾳ χρώμενος, ἐν φάει καὶ γυμνότητι διακαρτερῶν εἰς ἄκρον τε ὑπερβαλλούσης ἀκτημοσύνης ἐλαύνων, τοὺς ἀμφ’ αὐτὸν εἰς τὰ μάλιστα κατέπληττεν, μυρίους μὲν λυπῶν εὐχομένους αὐτῷ κοινωνεῖν τῶν ὑπαρχόντων δι’ οὓς ἑώρων αὐτὸν εἰσφέροντα περὶ τὴν θείαν διδασκαλίαν καμάτους, οὐ μὴν αὐτός γε ἐνδιδοὺς ταῖς καρτερίαις.
 λέγεται γοῦν καὶ πλειόνων ἐτῶν γῆν πεπατηκέναι μηδενὶ μηδαμῶς κεχρημένος ὑποδήματι, ἀλλὰ καὶ οἴνου χρήσεως καὶ τῶν ἄλλων παρὰ τὴν ἀναγκαίαν τροφὴν πλείστοις ἔτεσιν ἀπεσχημένος, ὥστε ἤδη εἰς κίνδυνον ἀνατροπῆς καὶ διαφθορᾶς τοῦ θώρακος περιπεσεῖν.
 volumes οf ancient literature which formerly he so fondly cherished, content if he who purchased them brought him four obolsa day.
 For a great number οf years he continued to live likea philosopher in this wise, putting aside everything that might lead to youthful lusts;
 all day long his discipline was to perform labours of no light character, and the greater part of the night he devoted himself to studying the divine Scriptures;
 and he persevered, as far as possible, in the most philosophic manner of life, at οne time disciplininghimselfby fasting, at another measuringοutthetimefor sleep, which he was careful to take, never ona couch, but οnthe floor.
 Αnd above all he considered that those sayings οf the Saviour in the Gospel οught to he kept which exhortus not to providetwo coats nor to use shoes, nor, indeed, to be worn οut with thoughts about the future.
 Yea, he was possessed οf a zeal beyond his years, and by persevering in cold and nakedness and going to the extremest limit οf poverty,he greatlyastounded his followers, causing grief to numbers who besought him to share their goods, when they saw the labour that he bestowed οn teaching divine things.
 But he was not one to slacken enduranee.
 Ηe is said, for example, to have walked ror many years without usinga shoe οfany description, yea more, to have refrained fora great many years from the use of wine and all except necessary food, so that he actuallyincurredthe risk of upsettingandinjuring his stomach.
 1 Τοιαῦτα δὴ φιλοσόφου βίου τοῖς θεωμένοις‘ παρέχων ὑποδείγματα, εἰκότως ἐπὶ τὸν ὅμοιον αὐτῷ ζῆλον πλείους παρώρμα τῶν φοιτητῶν, ὥστε ἤδη καὶ τῶν ἀπίστων ἐθνῶν τῶν τε ἀπὸ παιδείας καὶ φιλοσφίας οὐ τοὺς τυχόντας ὑπάγεσθαι τῆ δι’ αὐτοῦ διδασκαλίᾳ·
 οἷς καὶ αὐτοῖς γνησίως ἐν βάθει ψυχῆς τὴν εἰς τὸν θεῖον λόγον πίστιν δι’ αὐτοῦ παραδεχομένοις, διαπρέπειν συνέβαινεν κατὰ τὸν τότε τοῦ διωγμοῦ καιρόν, ὡς καί τινας αὐτῶν ἁλόντας μαρτυρίῳ τελειωθῆναι.
 IV.
 Πρῶτος μὲν οὗν τούτων ὁ μικρῷ πρόσθεν δηλωθεὶς Πλούταρχος ἢν·
 οὗ τὴν ἐπὶ θάνατον ἀπαγομένου, σμικροῦ δεῖν αὖθις ὁ περὶ οὗ ὁ λόγος, συμπαρὼν αὐτῷ εἰς ὑστάτην τοῦ βίου τελευτήν, ὑπὸ τῶν αὐτοῦ πολιτῶν ἀνῄρητο, ὡς αἴτιος αὐτῷ πεφηνὼς τοῦ θανάτου·
 θεοῦ δὲ αὐτὸν ἐτήρει καὶ τότε βουλή.
 μετὰ δὲ Πλούταρχον δεύτερος τῶν Ὠριγένους φοιτητῶν μάρτυς ἀναδείκνυται Σέρηνος, διὰ πυρὸς τὴν δοκιμὴν ἧς παρειλήφει πίστεως παρεσχημένος.
 τῆς αὐτῆς διατριβῆς τρίτος καθίσταται μάρτυς Ἡρακλείδης, καὶ ἐπὶ τούτῳ τέταρτος Ἥρων, ὁ μὲν πρότερος ἔτι κατηχούμενος, ὃ δὲ νεοφώτιστος, τὴν κεφαλὴν ἀποτμηθέντες.
 ἔτι πρὸς τούτοις τῆς αὐτῆς σχολῆς πέμπτος ἀθλητὴς εὐσεβείας ἀνακηρύττεται ἕτερος τοῦ πρώτου Σέρηνος, ὃν μετὰ πλείστην βασάνων ὑπομονὴν κεφαλῇ κολασθῆναι λόγος ἔχει.
 καὶ γυναικῶν δὲ Ἡραΐς ἔτι κατηχουμένη“ τὸ βάπτισμα,” ὥς πού φησιν αὐτός, τὸ διὰ πυρὸς λαβοῦσα, ” τὸν βίον ἐξελήλυθεν.
 Αnd by displaying proofs such as these οfa philosophic life to those who saw him, he naturally stimulateda large number of his pupils toa like zeal, so that, even among the unbelieving Gentiles and those from the ranks of learning and philosophy, some persons of no small account were won by his instruction.
 By his ageney these very persons received the faith of the divine Word truly in the depthsofthe soul, and were conspicuous at the persecution then taking place;
 insomuch that even some οf them were arrestedand perfected by martyrdom.
 IV.
 The first of these, then,was Plutarch,he whom we mentioneda little while ago.
 1 As this man was being led οn the way to death, he οf whom we have been speaking, being present with him to the very end of his life, was again almost killed by his fellow- citizens,as being clearly responsible for his death.
 But οn that occasionalso he was keptby the will of God.
2 Αnd, after Plutarch, Serenus was the second οf Origen's pupils to show himselfa martyr, having through fire given the proof of the faith he had received.
 From the same school Heraclides was the third martyr, and afterhim Ηero, the fourth;
 the former of these was stilla eatechumen,the latter lately baptized.
 Both were beheaded.
 Further, in addition to these, from the same school was proclaimeda fifth champion of piety,one serenus,a different person from the first- mentioned of that name.
 It is recorded that after very great endurance of torture his head was taken off.
 Αnd, among the women, Ηerais,who was still under instruction for baptism, as Οrigen himself sayssomewhere,“ received thebaptism by fire,” and so ended her life.
 V.
 Ἕβδομος ἐν τούτοις ἀριθμείσθω Βασιλείδης, τὴν περιβόητον ποταμίαιναν ἀπαγαγών, περὶ ἧς πολὺς ὁ λόγος εἰς ἔτι νῦν παρὰ τοῖς ἐπιχωρίοις ᾄδεται, μυρία μὲν ὑπὲρ τῆς τοῦ σώματος ἁγνείας τε καὶ παρθενίας, ἐν ἧ διέπρεψεν, πρὸς ἐραστὰς ἀγωνισαμένης( καὶ γὰρ οὗν αὐτῇ ἀκμαῖον πρὸς τῇ ψυχῇ καὶ τὸ τοῦ σώματος ὡραῖον ἐπήνθει), μυρία δὲ ἀνατλάσης καὶ τέλος μετὰ δεινὰς καὶ φρικτὰς εἰπεῖν βασάνους ἅμα μητρὶ Μαρκέλλῃ διὰ πυρὸς τελειωθείσης.
 φασί γέ τοι τὸν δικαστήν( Ἀκύλας ἦν τούτῳ ὄνομα) χαλεπὰς ἐπιθέντα αὐτῇ κατὰ παντὸς τοῦ σώματος αἰκίας, τέλος ἐφ’ ὕβρει τοῦ σώματος μονομάχοις αὐτὴν ἀπειλῆσαι παραδοῦναι·
 τὴν δὲ βραχύ τι πρὸς ἑαυτὴν ἐπισκεψαμένην ἐρωτηθεῖσαν ὃ κρίνειεν, τοιαύτην δοῦναι ἀπόκρισιν δι’ ἧς ἐδόκει νενομισμένον τι αὐτοῖς ἀσεβὲς ἀποφθέγξασθαι.
 ἅμα δὲ λόγῳ τὸν τῆς ἀποφάσεως ὅρον καταδεξαμένην ὁ Βασιλείδης, εἰς τις ὢν τῶν ἐν στρατείαις ἀναφερομένων, ἀπάγει παραλαβὼν τὴν ἐπὶ θανάτῳ.
 ὡς δὲ τὸ πλῆθος ἐνοχλεῖν αὐτὴν καὶ ἀκολάστοις ἐνυβρίζειν ῥήμασιν ἐπειρᾶτο, ὃ μὲν ἀνεῖργεν ἀποσοβῶν τοὺς ἐνυβρίζοντας, πλεῖστον ἔλεον καὶ φιλανθρωπίαν εἰς αὐτὴν ἐνδεικνύμενος, ἢ δὲ τῆς περὶ αὐτὴν συμπαθείας ἀποδεξαμένη τὸν ἄνδρα θαρρεῖν παρακελεύεται·
 ἐξαιτήσεσθαι γὰρ αὐτὸν ἀπελθοῦσαν παρὰ τοῦ ἑαυτῆς κυρίου καὶ οὐκ εἰς μακρὸν τῶν εἰς αὐτὴν πεπραγμένων τὴν ἀμοιβὴν ἀποτίσειν αὐτῷ.
 ταῦτα δ’ εἰποῦσαν γενναίως τὴν ἔξοδον ὑποστῆναι, πίττης ἐμπύρου κατὰ διάφορα μέρη τοῦ σώματος ἀπ’ ἄκρων ποδῶν καὶ μέχρι κορυφῆς ἠρέμα καὶ κατὰ βραχὺ περιχυθείσης αὐτῇ.
 καὶ ὁ μὲν τῆς ἀοιδίμου κόρηςv.
 Seventh among them must be numbered Basilides, who led away the famous Potamiaena.
 The praise οf this woman is to this day still loudly sung by her fellow- countrymen,as of one who onofthe chastity and virginity of her body, in which excelled, contended much with lovers( for assuredly her body,as well as her mind, was in the full bloom of its youthful beauty);
 as of onewhoendured much, and atthe end, after tortures that were terrible and fearful to relate, was perfectedby fire, along with her mother Marcella.
Ιt is said,in fact, that the judge, whose name was Aquila, after inflicting severe tortures upon her entire body, at last threatened to hand her over to the gladiators for bodily insult, and that, when aftera brief periodof reflection she was asked whather decision was, she madea reply which involved from their point of view something profane.
 No sooner hadshe spoken than she received the sentence, and Basilides, being one of those serving in the army, took her and led her away to death.
 And as the crowed tried to annoy her, and insult her with shameful words, he kept restraining them and driving away the insulters, displaying the greatest pity and kindness towards her.
 She on her part acceptedhis fellow- feeling forherand badehimbe of cheer, for thatshewould ask himfromher Lord, when she departed, and beforelong would requite him for what he had done for her.
 Thus speaking it is said, she right nobly endured the end, boiling pitch being poured slowly and little by little over different parts of her body from head to toe.
 Such was the contest waged by this maiden celebrated in τοιοῦτος κατηγώνιστο ἆθλος·
 οὐ μακρὸν δὲ χρόνον διαλιπὼν ὁ Βασλείδης ὅρκον διά τινα αἰτίαν πρὸς τῶν συστρατιωτῶν αἰτηθείς, μὴ ἐξεῖναι αὐτῷ τὸ παράπαν ὀμνύναι διεβεβαιοῦτο·
 χριστιανὸν γὰρ ὑπάρχειν καὶ τοῦτο ἐμφανῶς ὁμολογεῖν.
 παίζειν μὲν οὗν ἐνομίζετο τέως τὰ πρῶτα, ὡς δ’ ἐπιμόνως ἀπισχυρίζετο, ἄγεται ἐπὶ τὸν δικαστήν·
 ἐφ’ οὗ τὴν ἔνστασιν ὁμολογήσας, δεσμοῖς παραδίδοται.
 τῶν δὲ κατὰ θεὸν ἀδελφῶν ὡς αὐτὸν ἀφικνουμένων καὶ τὴν αἰτίαν τῆς ἀθρόας καὶ παραδόξου ταύτης ὁρμῆς πυνθανομένων, λέγεται εἰπεῖν ὡς ἄρα Ποταμίαινα τρισὶν ὕστερον ἡμέραις τοῦ νύκτωρ ἐπιστᾶσα, στέφανον αὐτοῦ τῇ κεφαλῇ περιθεῖσα εἴη φαίη τε παρακεκληκέναι χάριν αὐτοῦ τὸν κύριον καὶ τῆς ἀξιώσεως τετυχηκέναι οὐκ εἰς μακρόν τε αὐτὸν παραλήψεσθαι.
 ἐπὶ τούτοις τῶν ἀδελφῶν τῆς ἐν κυρίῳ σφραγῖδος μεταδόντων αὐτῷ, τῆ μετέπειτα ἡμέρᾳ τῷ τοῦ κυρίου διαπρέψας μαρτυρίῳ τὴν κεφαλὴν ἀποτέμνεται.
 καὶ ἄλλοι δὲ πλείους τῶν κατ’ Ἀλεξάνδρειαν ἀθρόως τῷ χριστοῦ λόγῳ προσελθεῖν κατὰ τοὺς δηλουμένους ἐπιφανείσης ὡς δὴ καθ’ ὕπνους τῆς δηλουμένους ἐπιφανείσης καὶ προσκεκλημένης αὐτούς.
 ἀλλὰ ταῦτα μὲν ὧδε ἐχέτω.
 VI.
 Πάνταινον δὲ Κλήμης διαδεξάμενος, τῆς κατ’ Ἀλεξάνδρειαν κατηχήσεως εἰς ἐκεῖνο τοῦ καιροῦ καθηγεῖτο, ὡς καὶ τὸν Ὠριγένην τῶν φοιτητῶν γενέαθαι αὐτοῦ.
 τήν γέ τοι τῶν Στρωματέων πραγματείαν ὁ Κλήμης ὑπομνηματιζόμενος, κατὰ τὸ πρῶτον σύγγραμμα χρονικὴν ἐκθέμενος γραφήν, εἰς τὴν Κομόδου τελευτὴν περιγράφει τοὺς χρόνους, ὡς εἶναι σαφὲς ὅτι κατὰ song.
 Αnd not long afterwards, when Basilides was ked by his felleow- soldiers to swear for some reason οther, he stoutly affirmed that swearing was οlutely forbidden in his case, for that he was a ristian and acknowledged it openly.
 Αt first, deed, for a time they thought he was jesting, but hen he continued stedfastlyto affirm it, they ought him to the judge.
 Αnd when he admittede constancy of his professionin his presence, he as committed to prison.
 when his brethren in Gode to and inquired the reason of this suddend incredible impulse, it is said that he stated that ee days after her martyrdom Potamiaena appeared him by night, wreathing his head with a crown and saying that she had called upon the Lord for him, and obtained what she requerted, and that before ng she would take him to herself.
 Thereupon the brethren imparted to him the seal inthe Lord, andnthe day afterwards he gave notable testimony for the Lord and was beheaded.
 Αnd it is related that many others of those at Alexandria came over all at οncetothe word of Christinthe time ofthe persons mentioned, because Ρotamiaena appeared to them in dreams and invited thern.
 But this must suffice.
 VI.
 Ρantaenus was succeeded by Clement, who directed the instruction at Alexandria up to sucha date that Origen alsowas one of his pupils.
 In fact lement, when compilinghis Stromateis, in the firstk displaysachronological table, using the death of Commodus as a terminus in measuring his dates1;
 so that itis clear thattheworkwas composed by him Σευῆρον αὐτῷ πεπόνητο τὰ σπουδάσματα, οὗ τοὺς χρόνους ὁ παρὼν ἱστορεῖ λόγος.
 VII.
 Ἐν τούτῳ καὶ Ἰούδας, συγγραφέων ἕτερος, εἰς τὰς παρὰ τῷ Δανιὴλ ἑβδομήκοντα ἑβδομάδας ἐγγράφως διαλεχθείς, ἐπὶ τὸ δέκατον τῆς Σευήρου βασιλείας ἵστησιν τὴν χρονογραφίαν·
 ὃς καὶ τὴν θρυλουμένην τοῦ ἀντιχρίστου παρουσίαν ἤδη τότε πΛησιάζειν ᾤετο·
 οὕτω σφοδρῶς ἢ τοῦ καθ’ ἡμῶν τότε διωγμοῦ κίνησις τὰς τῶν πολλῶν ἀνατεταράχει διανοίας.
 VIII.
 Ἐν τούτῳ δὲ τῆς κατηχήαεως ἐπὶ τῆς Ἀλεξανδρείας τοὔργον ἐπιτελοῦντι τῷ Ὠριγένει πρᾶγμά τι πέπρακται φρενὸς μὲν ἀτελοῦς καὶ νεανικῆς, πίστεώς γε μὴν ὁμοῦ καὶ μέγιστον δεῖγμα περιέχον.
 τὸ γὰρ“ εἰσὶν εὐωνοῦχοι οἵτινες εὐνούχισαν ἑαυτοὺς διὰ τὴν βασιλείαν οὐρανῶν’’ ἁπΛούστερον καὶ νεανικώτερον ἐκλαβών, ὁμοῦ μὲν σωτήριον φωνὴν ἀποπληροῦν οἰόμενος, ὁμοῦ δὲ καὶ διὰ τὸ νέον τὴν ἡλικίαν ὄντα μὴ ἀνδράσι μόνον, καὶ γυναιξὶ δὲ τὰ θεῖα προσομιλεῖν, ὡς ἂν πᾶσαν τὴν παρὰ τοῖς ἀπίστοις αἰσχρᾶς διαβολῆς ὑπόνοιαν ἀποκλείσειεν, τὴν σωτήριον φωνὴν ἔργοις ἐπιτελέσαι ὡρμήθη, τοὺς πολλοὺς τῶν ἀμφ’ αὐτὸν γνωρίμων διαλαθεῖν φροντίσας.
 οὐκ ἦν δὲ ἄρα δυνατὸν αὐτῷ καίπερ βουλομένῳ τοσοῦτον ἔργον ἐπικρύψασθαι.
 γνοὺς δῆτα ὕστερον ὁ Δημήτριος, ἅτε τῆς αὐτόθι παροικίας προεστώς, εὖ μάλα μὲν αὐτὸν ἀποθαυμάζει τοῦ τολμήματος, τὴν δέ γε προθυμίαν καὶ τὸ γνήσιον αὐτοῦ τῆς πίστεως ἀποδεξάμενος, θαρρεῖν παρακελεύεται, καὶ νῦν μᾶλλον ἔχεαθαι αὐτὸν τοῦ τῆς κατηχήσεως ἔργου παρορμᾷ.
 under Severus, whose time this present account is describing.
 VII.
 Αt this time Judas also, another writer, composed a written discourse on the seventy weeks in the book of Daniel;
 he stops his record of time at the tenth year of the reign of Severus.
 Ηe also was of the opinion that the much talked of coming of the antichrist was then already near.
 So strongly did the persecution which was then stirred up against us disturb the minds of the many.
 VIII.
 Αt that time, while Οrigen was performing the work of instruction at Alexandria, he dida thing which gave abundant proof of an immatureand youthful mind, yet withal of faith and self- control.
 For he took the saying,“ There are eunuchs which made themselves eunuchs for the kingdom of heaven’s sake,” intoo literal and extremea sense, and both to fulfilthe Saviour’s saying,and also that might prevent all suspicion of shameful slander on the part of unbelievers( for, young as he was, he usedto discourse on divine things with women as well as men), he hastened to put into effect the Saviour's Saying, taking care to escape the notice of the greater number of his pupils.
 But, wishful thoughhe might be, it was not possible to hidea deed of this nature.
 In fact Demetrius got to knowofit later, since he was presiding over the community at that place;
 and while he marvelled exceedingly at him forhis rash act, he approved the zeal and the sinceriry of his faith, bade him be of good cheer, and urged him to attach himself now all the more to the workof instruction.
 Αλλὰ τότε μὲν οὗτος τοιοῦτός τις ἢν·
 οὐ μακροῖς δὲ χρόνοις ὕστερον ὁ αὐτὸς ὁρῶν εὖ πράττοντα μέγαν τε καὶ λαμπρὸν καὶ παρὰ πᾶσιν ὄντα βεβοημένον, ἀνθρώπινόν τι πεπονθώς τοῖς ἀνὰ τὴν οἰκουμένην ἐπισκόποις καταγράφειν ὡς ἀτοπωτάτου τοῦ πραχθέντος ἐπειρᾶτο, ὅτε τῶν κατὰ Παλαιστίνων οἱ μάλιστα δόκιμοι καὶ διαπρέποντες Καισαρείας τε καὶ Ἱεροσολύμων ἐπίσκοποι πρεσβείων τὸν Ὠριγένην καὶ τῆς ἀνωτάτω τιμῆς ἄξιον εἶναι δοκιμάσαντες, χεῖρας εἰς πρεσβυτέριον αὐτῷ τεθείκασιν.
 τηνικαῦτα δ’ οὖν εἰς μέγα δόξης προελθόντος ὄνομά τε παρὰ τοῖς πανταχῆ πᾶσιν ἀνθρώποις καὶ κλέος ἀρετῆς καὶ σοφίας οὐ σμικρὸν κτησαμένου, μηδεμιᾶς ἄλλης εὐπορῶν ὁ Δημήτριος κατηγορίας, τῆς πάλαι ἐν παιδὶ γεγονυίας αὐτῷ πράξεως δεινὴν ποιεῖται διαβολήν, συμπεριλαβεῖν τολμήσας ταῖς κατηγορίαις τοὺς ἐπὶ τὸ πρεσβυτέριον αὐτὸν προάξαντας.
 Ταῦτα μὲν οὖν μικρὸν ἐπράχθη ὕστερον·
 τότε γε μὴν ὁ Ὠριγένης ἐπὶ τῆς Ἀλεξανδρείας τὸ τῆς θείας διδασκαλίας ἔργον εἰς ἅπαντας ἀφυλάκτως τοὺς προσιόντας νύκτωρ καὶ μεθ’ ἡμέραν ἐπετέλει, τοῖς θείοις ἀόκνως μαθήμασιν καὶ τοῖς ὡς αὐτὸν φοιτῶσιν τὴν πᾶσαν ἀνατιθεὶς σχολήν.
 Επὶ δέκα δὲ καὶ ὀκτὼ ἔτεσιν τὴν ἀρχὴν ἐπικρατήσαντα Σευῆρον Ἀντωνῖνος ὁ παῖς διαδέχεται.
 ἐν τούτῳ δὲ τῶν κατὰ τὸν διωγμὸν ἀνδρισαμένων καὶ μετὰ τοὺς ἐν ὁμολογίαις ἀγῶνας διὰ προνοίας θεοῦ πεφυλαγμένων εἷς τις ὢν Ἀλέξανδρος, ὃν ἀρτίως ἐπίσκοπον τῆς ἐν Ἱεροσολύμοις ἐκκλησία ἐδηλώσαμεν, οἷα ταῖς ὑπ’ ἑῥ’ Χριστοῦ διαπρέψας Such indeed was his attitude at that time.
 But not Iong afterwards, when the same person saw that he was prospering and a great man and distinguished and famous in the sight of all, overcome bya human weakness, he attemptedto describe the deed as monstrous to the bishops throughout the world, when the most highly approved and distinguished bishops in Palestine, namely those of Caesarea and Jerusalem, 1 deeming Origen worthy of privilege and the highest honour, ordained him to the presbyterate by laying on of hands.
 2 So, as he had then advanced to a position of great esteem, and had aequired no small reputation and fame for his virtue and wisdom in the eyes ofall men everywhere, through lack of any other ground οf aceusation Demetrius spread grave scandal about the deed that he had committed long ago whena boy, and had the temerity to include in his accusations those who raised him to the presbyterate.
 This happened a little while afterwards.
 Αt that time, however, Origen was engaged at Αlexandria in the work or divine instructionfor all, without reserve, who cametohim by nightandin the courseof the day,devoting his whole time untiringly to the divine studies and his pupils.
 When Severus had held the principate for eighteen years, he was succeeded by his son Antoninus.
 3 this time Αlexander( being oneofthose who Ρlayedtheman during the persecution and after contending for the faith by their confessions were preserved by the Providenceof God), whom we have mentioned lately4 as bishop of the church at Jerusalem, deemed worthyofthe said bishopric, distinguished ὁμολογίαις, τῆς δηλωθείσης ἐπισκοπῆς ἀξιοῦται, ἔτι Ναρκίσσου, ὃς ἦν αὐτοῦ πρότερος, περιόντος τῷ βίῳ.
 ΙX.
 Πόλλα μὲν οὗν καὶ ὤα παράδοξα οἱ τῆς παροικίας πολῖται ὡς ἐκ παραδόσεως τῶν κατὰ διαδοχὴν ἀδελφῶν τοῦ Ναρκίσσου μνημονεύουσιν, ἐν οἷς καὶ τοιόνδε τι θαῦμα δι’ αὐτοῦ γεγονὸς ἱστοροῦσιν.
 κατὰ τὴν μεγάλην ποτὲ τοῦ διανυκτέρευσιν τοὔλαιόν φασιν τοῖς διακόνοις ἐπιλιπεῖν·
 ἐφ’ ᾧ τὸ πᾶν πλῆθος δεινῆς ἀθυμίας διαλαβούσης, τὸν Νάρκισσον τοῖς τὰ φῶτα παρασκευάζουσιν ἐπιτάξαι ὕδωρ ἀνιμήσαντας ὡς αὐτὸν κομιεῖσθαι.
 τούτου δὲ ἅμα λόγῳ πραχθέντος, ἐπευξάμενον τῷ ὕδατι, ἐγχέαι κατὰ τῶν λύχνων πίστει τῆ εἰς τὸν κύριον γνησίᾳ παρακελεύσασθαι·
 ποιησάντων δὲ καὶ τοῦτο, παρὰ πάντα λόγον δυνάμει παραδόξῳ καὶ θείᾳ μεταβαλεῖν ἐξ ὕδατος εἰς ἐλαίου ποιότητα τὴν φύσιν, παρά τε πΛείστοις τῶν αὐτόθι ἀδελφῶν ἐπὶ μήκιστον ἐξ ἐκείνου καὶ εἰς ἡμᾶς βραχύ τι δεῖγμα τοῦ τότε θαύματος φυλαχθῆναι.
 Ἄλλα τε πλεῖστα περὶ τοῦ βίου τοῦδε τοῦ ἀνδρὸς μνήμης ἄξια καταλέγουσιν, ἐν οἷς καὶ τοιόνδε τι.
 τὸ εὔτονον αὐτοῦ καὶ στερρὸν τοῦ βίου φαῦλοί τινες ἀνθρωπίσκοι μὴ οἷοί τε φέρειν, δέει τοῦ μὴ δίκην ὑποσχεῖν ἁλόντας, διὰ τὸ μυρία κακὰ ἑαυτοῖς συνεγνωκέναι, συσκευὴν κατ’ αὐτοῦ προλαβόντες συρράπτουσιν καί τινα δεινὴν καταχέουσιν αὐτοῦ διαβολήν.
 εἶτα πιστούμενοι τοὺς ἀκροωμένους, ὅρκοις ἐβεβαίουν τὰς κατηγορίας, καὶ ὃ μέν, ἦ μὴν ἀπόλοιτο πυρί, ὤμνυεν, ὃ δέ, ἦ μὴν σκαιᾷ νόσῳ δαπανηθείη τὸ σῶμα, ὁ δὲ τρίτος, he wasforhis confessions on behalf of Christ;
 issus his predecessor being still alive.
 1 IX.
 Many οther miracles, indeed,of Νarcissus doe citizens ofthe community call to mind, as handed wn by the brethren in succession, and among these ey relate that the following wonder was performed him.
 Once at the great all- night vigil of the ascha it is said that the oil failed the deacons, and at when deep despondency seizedthe whole ultitude, thereupon Narcissus commanded those ho were preparing the lights to draw water and ring it to him;
 that when this was no sooner said an done, he then prayedοver the water, and bade em pour it down into the lamps with unfeigned ith in the Lord.
 Αnd that when theydid this, contrary to all reason by miraculous and divine power nature was changed in quality from water into il;
 and that fora very long time, from that day even ours,a little was preserved asa οf that wonder former days by very many οfthebrethren there.
 Αnd they enumeratea great many other things about the life of this man worthyof mention, among which is the following.
 Certain miserable creatures, not being able to endure his energy and the firmnessofhis conduct,and fearing lest they should be taken and put on their trial( for they were conscious of many evil deeds), anticipated the event by devising an intrigue agrinst him and spreadinga certain grave slander to his hurt.
 Then, with a view to securing the belief οf their hearers, they strove to confirm their accusations by oaths;
 one swore,“ if thisisnot true ayIbe destroyed by fire”;
 another,“ mayybe wasted byan untoward diseasse”;
 and ἢ μὴν τὰς ὁράσεις πηρωθείη·
 ἀλλ’ οὐδ’ οὕτω.
 αὐτοῖς, καίπερ ὀμνύουσιν, τῶν πιστῶν τις προσεῖχε τὸν νοῦν διὰ τὴν εἰς πάντας λάμπουσαν ἐκ τοῦ παντὸς σωφροσύνην τε καὶ πανάρετον ἀγωγὴν τοῦ Ναρκίσσου.
 αὐτός γε μὴν τὴν τῶν εἰρημένων μηδαμῶς ὑπομένων μοχθηρίαν καὶ ἄλλως ἐκ μακροῦ τὸν φιλόσοφον ἀσπαζόμενος βίον, διαδρὰς πᾶν τὸ τῆς ἐκκλησίας πλῆθος, ἐν ἐρημίαις καὶ ἀφανέσιν ἀγροῖς λανθάνων πλείστοις ἔτεσιν διέτριβεν.
 ἀλλ’ οὐ καὶ ὁ τῆς δίκης μέγας ὀφθαλμὸς ἐπὶ τοῖς πεπραγμένοις ἠρέμει, μετῄει δὲ ὡς τάχιστα τοὺς ἀσεβεῖς αἷς καθ’ ἑαυτῶν ἐπιορκοῦντες κατεδήσαντο ἀραῖς.
 ὁ μὲν οὖν πρῶτος, ἐκ μηδεμιᾶς προφάσεως ἁπλῶς οὕτως, μικροῦ διαπεσόντος ἐφ’ ἧς κατέμενεν οἰκίας σπινθῆρος, νύκτωρ ὑφαφθείσης ἁπάσης, παγγενεὶ καταφλέγεται·
 δ’ δὲ ἀθρόως τὸ σῶμα ἐξ ἄκρων ποδῶν ἐπὶ κεφαλὴν ἧς αὐτὸς προσετίμησεν ἑαυτῷ νόσου πίμπλαται·
 ὁ δὲ τρίτος τὰς τῶν προτέρων συνιδὼν ἐκβάσεις καὶ τοῦ πάντων ἐφόρου θεοῦ τρέσας τὴν ἀσιάδραστον δίκην, ὁμολογεῖ μὲν τοῖς πᾶσιν τὰ κοινῇ σφίσιν αὐτοῖς ἐσκευωρημένα, τοσαύταις δὲ κατετρύχετο μεταμελόμενος οἰμωγαῖς δακρύων τε ἐς τοσοῦτον οὐκ ἀπέλιπεν, ἕως ἄμφω διεφθάρη τὰς ὄφεις.
 καὶ οἵδε μὲν τῆς ψευδολουίας τοιαύτας ὑπέσχον τιμωρίας·
χ’.
 τοῦ δὲ Ναρκίσσου γινωσκομένου, καὶ μηδαμῶς ὅπῃ ὢν τυγχάνοι, γινωσκομένου, δόξαν τοῖς τῶν ὁμόρων ἐκκληαιῶν προεστῶσιν, ἐφ’ ἑτέρου μετίασιν ἐπισκόπου χειροτονίαν·
 Δῖος τούτῳ ὄνομα ἢν·
 ὃν οὐ πολὺν προστάντα χρόνον Γερμανίων διαδέχεται, καὶ τοῦτον Γόρδιος·
 καθ’ third,“ may my eyes be blinded.
” But, swearey might, none of the faithful gave heed to them, the the fame of Narcissus 's sobriety and virtuous nner of life was always well known to all.
 Ηe, vertheless, could not brook the wickedness of what beensaid, and, besides, had fora long time been uing the philosophic life,;
 so he escaped the οle companyofthe church,and spent many years cretly in deserts and obscure parts οf the country.
 et the great eye of Justice did not remain quiet at ese deeds, but with untmost speed visited upon those ess men the curses with which in their perjury ey had bound themselves.
 So the firstwas burnt death withallhis family,the house in whichhe as staying being wholly set on fire one night from solutely no other cause than a small spark which ppened to fall οn it;
 as for the second, his bodyas convered,all at once, from headto toe withtheisease that hehadassigned to himself asa penalty;
d the third, perceiving the hap of the οthero, and fearingtheineritable judgement of God who seeth all, made public confession of what they plotted together in common.
 Yet, in the act of repentance, so great were the lamentations by hich he was wasted, so many were the tears that me unceasingly poured forth, that botheyes were troyed.
 such were the punishments that these men suffered their falsehood.
 X.
 But as Narcissus had retired no one knew wherehe might be, it seemed good those presiding over the neighbouring churches to eed to the appointment οf another bishop.
 Ηise was Dius.
 Αfter a brief presidency he was cceededby Germanion, and he in turn by Gordius.
 ὃν ὥσπερ ἐξ ἀναβιώσεως ἀναφανείς ποθεν Νάρκισσος αὗθις ὑπὸ τῶν ἀδελφῶν ἐπὶ τὴν προστασίαν παρακαλεῖται, μειζόνως ἔτι μᾶλλον τῶν πάντων ἀγασθέντων αὐτὸν τῆς τε ἀναχωρήσεως ἕνεκα καὶ τῆς φιλοσοφίας καὶ ἐφ’ ἅπασιν δι’ ἢν παρὰ τοῦ θεοῦ κατηξίωτο ἐκδίκησιν.
 XI.
 καὶ δὴ μηκέθ’ οἵου τε ὄντος λειτουργεῖν διὰ λιπαρὸν γῆρας, τὸν εἰρημένον Ἀλέξανδρον, ἐπίακοπον ἑτέρας ὑπάρχοντα παροικίας, οἰκονομία θεοῦ ἐπὶ τὴν ἅμα τῷ Ναρκίσσῳ λειτουργίαν ἐκάλει κατὰ ἀποκάλυψιν νύκτωρ αὐτῷ δι’ ὁράματος φανεῖσαν.
 ταύτῃδ’ οὖν, ὡς κατά τι θεοπρόπιον, ἐκ τῆς Καππαδοκῶν γῆς, ἔνθα τὸ πρῶτον τῆς ἐπισκοπῆς ἠξίωτο, τὴν πορείαν ἐπὶ τὰ πεποιημένον εὐχῆς καὶ τῶν τόπων ἰατορίας ἕνεκεν πεποιημένον φιλοφρονέστατα οἱ τῇδε ὑπολαβόντες οὐκέτ’ οἴκαδε αὐτῷ παλινοστεῖν ἐπιτρέπουσιν καθ’ ἑτέραν καὶ αὐτοῖς νύκτωρ ὀφθεῖσαν μίαν τε φωνὴν σαφεστάτην τοῖς μάλιστα αὐτῶν σπουδαίοις χρήσασαν·
 ἐδήλου γὰρ προελθόντας ἔξω πυλῶν τὸν ἐκ θεοῦ προωρισμένον αὐτοῖς ἐπίσκοπον ὑποδέξασθαι·
 τοῦτο δὲ πράξαντες, μετὰ κοινῆς τῶν ἐπισκόπων, οἳ τὰς πέριξ διεῖπον ἐκκλησία γνώμης ἐπάναγκες αὐτὸν παραμένειν βιάζονται.
 μνημονεύει γέ τοι καὶ αὐτὸς ὁ Ἀλέξανδρος ἐν ἰδίαις ἐπιστολαῖς ταῖς πρὸς’ Αωτινοΐτας, εἰς ἔτι νῦν παρ’ ἡμῖν σῳζομέναις, τῆς Ναρκίσσου σὺν προεδρίας, ταῦτα κατὰ λέξιν ἐπὶ τέλει γράφων In his day Narcissus appeared from somewhere, as if come to life again, and was onee more summoned to the presideneybythe brethren, for all admired him toa still greater degree because of his retirement and philosophic life, and especially because οf the punishment with which God had deemed it meet to avenge him.
 XI.
 Αnd when he was no longer able to perform the ministry on account of ripe old age, the abovementioned1 Alexander, being bishop of another community, was called bya dispensarion of God toa joint ministry with Narcissus, by a revelation which appeared to him ina vision at night.
 Whereupon, as if in obedienceto some oraele, he made the journey rom the land of the Cappadocians, where he was rst deemed worthy of the episeopate,to Jerusalem, for the purpose of prayer and investigation οf the sacred places.
 The people there gave him the most ordial welcome, and suffered him not to returnhome gain,in accordance with another revelation which as seen by them also at night, and which vouchsafedn identieal utterance of the clearest kind to thosef them who were peculiarly zealous.
 For it indieatedo them to go forth outside the gates and welcome as heir bishop him who was fore- ordained of God.
 Αnd oing this, with the common consent of the bishops ho were administering thechurches round about, hey compelled him of necessityto remain.
 Αnd in fact Alexander himself ina personal letter to the ntinoites, 2 which is still to this day preserved, mentions Narcissusas holding the chief place long with him, writing as follows, in these very words, τῆς ἐπιστολῆς,“ ἀσπάζεται ὑμᾶς Νάρκισσος πρὸ ἐμοῦ διέπων τὸν τόπον τῆς ἐπισκοπῆς τὸν ἐνθάδε καὶ νῦν συνεξεταζόμενός μένος μοι διὰ τῶν εὐχῶν, ρݲιݲςݲ ἔτη ἠνυκώς, παρακαλῶν ὑμᾶς ὁμοίως ὁμοφρονῆσαι.
” Καὶ ταῦτα μὲν οὕτως εἶχεν·
 τῆς δὲ κατ’ Ἀντιόχειαν ἐκκλησίας, Σεραπίωνος ἀναπαυσαμένου, τὴν ἐπισκοπὴν διαδέχεται Ἀσκληπιάδης, ἐν ταῖς κατὰ τὸν διωγμὸν ὁμολογίαις διαπρέψας καὶ μέμνηται καὶ τῆς τούτου καταστάσεως’ Αλέξανδρος Αντιοχεῦσιν γράφων ὧδε·
“’ Αλέξανδρος, δοῦλος καὶ δέσμιος Ἰησοῦ Χριστοῦ, τῇ μακαρίᾳ Ἀντιοχέων ἐκκλησίᾳ ἐν κυρίῳ χαίρειν.
 ἐλαφρά μοι καἰ κοῦφα τὰ δεσμὰ ὁ κύριος ἐποίησεν, κατὰ τὸν καιρὸν τῆς εἱρκτῆς πυθομένῳ τῆς ἁγίας ὑμῶν τῶν Ἀντιοχέων ἐκκΛησίας κατὰ τὴν θείαν πρόνοιαν Ἀσκληπιάδην τὸν ἐπιτηδειότατον κατ’ ἀξίαν τὴν πίστιν τῆς ἐπισκοπῆς ἐγκεχειρισμένον.
 ” ταύτην δὲ τὴν ἐπιστοΛὴν σημαίνει διὰ Κλήμεντος ἀπεσταλκέναι, πρὸς τῷ τέλει τοῦτον γράφων τὸν τρόπον·
 “ ταῦτα δὲ ὑμῖν, κύριοί μου ἀδελφοί, τὰ γράμματα ἀπέστειλα διὰ Κλήμεντος τοῦ μακαρίου πρεσβυτέρου, ἀνδρὸς ἐναρέτου καὶ δοκίμου, ὃν ἴστε καὶ ὑμεῖς καὶ ἐπιγνώσεσθε·
 ὃς παρὼν κατὰ τὴν πρόνοιαν καὶ ἐπισκοπὴν τοῦ δεσπότου ἐπεστήριξέν τε καὶ ηὔξησεν τὴν τοῦ κυρίου ἐκκλησίαν.
” XII.
 Τοῦ μὲν οὖν Σεραπίωνος τῆς περὶ λόγου ἀσκήσεως καὶ ἄλλα μὲν εἰκὸς σῴζεσθαι πα ἑτέροις ὑπομνήματα, εἰς ἡμᾶς δὲ μόνα κατῆλθε τὰ Πρὸς Δόμνον, ἐκπεπτωκότα τινὰ παρὰ τό τοῦ διωγμοῦ καιρὸν ἀπὸ τῆς εἰς Χριστὸν πίστεω the close of the letter:
 “ Narcissus greets you, who before me was holding the position of bishop here, and now is associated with me in the prayers, aving completed 116 years;
 and exhorts you, asI likewise,to beof one mind.
” So wasitwith these matters.
 But when Serapion tered upon his rest, Asclepiades succeeded to the ishopric of the chureh at Antioch, and he was self distinguished for his confessions in the(??) ersecution.
 Αlexander also his his appointent, writing thusto the Antiochenes:
“ Αlexander,slave and prisoner οf Jesus Christ, to the blessed urchof the Antioehenes, greeting in the Lord.
 Light and easy did the Lord makemy bonds, when learnt at the time οf my imprisonment that by the vine Ρrovidence Αsclepiades, whose worthy faith es him most suitable, had been entrusted with the ishopric of your holy church of the Antiochenes.
” This epistle he indicates had been sent by the handf Clement, 1 writing at the close in this is letterIsend unto you,my dear brethren, by the and of Clement the blessed presbyter,a man irtuous and approved, of whomye yourselves alsove heard, and with whom ye will become acquainted;
o also, when he was present here in accordanceh the providenceand overseership of the Master, th stablishedand increased the Churchofthe rd.
” XII.
 Νοw it is likely, indeed, that other memoirs, the fruitof Serapion's literary studies, are reservedby other persons, but there have come wn to us only those addressed To Domnus, οne ho had fallen away from the faith of Christ, at the ἐπὶ τὴν Ἰουδαικὴν ἐθελοθρῃσκείαν, καὶ τὰ Πρὸς Πόντιον καὶ Καρικόν, ἐκκλησιαστικοὺς ἄνδρας, καὶ ἄλλαι πρὸς ἑτέρους ἐπιστολαί, ἕτερός τε συντεταγμένος αὐτῷ λόγος Περὶ τοῦ λεγομένου κατὰ Πέτρον εὐαγγελίου, ὃν πεποίηται ἀπελέγχων τὰ ψευδῶς ἐν αὐτῷ εἰρημένα διά τινας ἐν τῇ κατὰ Ῥωσσὸν παροικίᾳ προφάσει τῆς εἰρημένης γραφῆς εἰς ἑτεροδόξους διδασκαλίας ἀποκείλαντας·
 ἀφ’ οὗ εὔλογον βραχείας παραθέσθαι λέξεις, δι’ ὧν ἢν εἶχεν περὶ τοῦ βιβλίου γνώμην προτίθησι οὕτω γράφων·
“ ἡμεῖς γάρ, ἀδελφοί, καὶ Πέτρον καὶ τοὺς ἄλλους ἀποστόλους ἀποδεχόμεθα ὡς Χριστόν, τὰ δὲ ὀνόματι αὐτῶν ψευδεπίγραφα ἔμπειροι παραιτούμεθα, γινώσκοντες ὅτι τὰ τοιαῦτα οὐ παρελάβομεν.
 ἐγὼ γὰρ γενόμενος παρ’ ὑμῖν ὑπενόουν τοὺς πάντας ὀρθῇ πίστει προφερόμενον καὶ μὴ διελθὼν τὸ ὑπ’ αὐτῶν προφερόμενον ὀνόματι Πέτρου εὐαγγέλιον, εἶπον ὅτι εἰ τοῦτό ἐστιν μόνον τὸ δοκοῦν ὑμῖν παρέχειν μικροψυχίαν, ἀναγινωσκέσθω·
 νῦν δὲ μαθὼν ὅτι αἱρέσει τινὶ ὁ νοῦς αὐτῶν ἐφώλευεν, ἐκ τῶν λεχθέντων μοι, σπουδόσω πάλιν γενέσθαι πρὸς ὑμᾶς, ὥστε ἀδελφοί, προσδοκᾶτέ με ἐν τάχει.
 ἡμεῖς δέ ἀδελφοί, καταλαβόμενοι ὁποίας ἢν αἱρέσεως Μαρκιανός, <ὃς> καὶ ἑαυτῷ ἐναντιοῦτο, μὴ timeofthe persecution,to Jewish will- worship;
 and those To Pontius and Caricus, churchmen,and other letters to other persons;
 and another book has been composed by him Concerning what is known as the Gospelof Peter, 1 which he has written refuting falsestatementsin it, because of certainin the communityof Rhossus,who οn the groundofthe said writing turned aside into heterodox teaehings.
 It will notbeunreasonable to quotea short passagefrom this work, in whichhe puts forwardthe view he held aboutthe book, writing as follows:
 “ For οur part, brethren,we receive both Peter and the οtherapostlesas Christ,but the writings which falsely bear their names we reject, as menof experience, knowing that such were not handed down to us.
 ForI myself, whenIeame among you, imagined that all οf you clung to the true faith;
 and, without going through the Gospel put forward by them in the namef Peter,I said:
 If this isthe only thing that seemingly causes captious feelings among you, let it be read.
 But sinceI have now learnt, from what hasbeentold me, that their mindwas lurking in some holeοf hersey, 2I shall give diligence to come again to you;
 wherefore, brethren, expect me quikly.
 ut we, brethren, gathering to what whatofheresy arcianus3 belonged( who4 usedtocontradict himself,not knowing what he was saying, as ye will learnδ’ ἐλάλει, ἃ μαθήσεσθε ἐξ ὧν ὑμῖν ἐγράφη, ἐδυνήθημεν γὰρ παρ’ ἄλλων τῶν ἀσκησάντω ναὐτὸ τοῦτο τὸ εὐαγγέλιον, τοῦτ’ ἐστὶν παρὰ τῶν διαδόχων τῶν καταρξαμένων αὐτοῦ, οὓς Δοκητὰς καλοῦμεν( τὰ γὰρ πλείονα φρονήματα ἐκείνων ἐστὶ τῆς διδασκαλίας), χρησάμενοι παρ’ αὐτῶν διελθεῖν καὶ εὑρεῖν τὰ μὲν πλείονα τοῦ ὀρθοῦ λόγου τοῦ σωτῆρος, τινὰ δὲ προσδιεσταλμένα, ἃ καὶ ὑπετάξαμεν ὑμῖν.
 XIII.
 καὶ ταῦτα μὲν τὰ Σεραπίωνος.
 Τοῦ δὲ Κλήμεντος Στρωματεῖς, οἱ πάντες ὀκτώ, παρ’ ἡμῖν σῴζονται, οὓς καὶ ἠξίωσεν προγραφῆς“ Τίτου Φλαυίου Κλήμεντος τῶν κατὰ τὴν ἀληθῆ Φιλοσοφίαν γνωστικῶν ὑπομνημάτων στρωματεῖς,” ἰσάριθμοί τε τούτοις εἰσὶν οἱ ἐπιγεγραμμένοι Ὑποτυπώσεων λόγοι, ἐν οἷς ὀνομαστὶ ὡς διδασκάλου τοῦ Πανταίνου μνημονεύει ἐκδοχάς τε αὐτοῦ γραφῶν καὶ παραδόσεις ἐκτέθειται·
 ἔστιν δὲ αὐτῷ καὶ πρὸς Ἕλληνας λόγος ὁ Προτρεπτικὸς τρεῖς τε οἱ τοῦ ἐπιγεγραμμένου Παιδαγωγοῦ καὶ“ Τίς ὁ σῳζόμενος πλούσιος” οὕτως ἐπιγραφεὶς ἕτερος αὐτοῦ λόγος τό τε Περὶ τοῦ πάσχα σύγγραμμα καὶ διαλέξεις Περὶ νηστείας καὶ Περὶ καταλαλιᾶς καὶ ὁ Προτρεπτικὸς εἰς ὑπομονὴν ἢ πρὸς τοὺς νεωστὶ βεβαπτισμένους καὶ ὁ ἐπιγεγραμμένος κανὼν ἐκκλησιαστικὸς ἢ πρὸς τοὺς Ἰουδαΐζοντας, ὃν Ἀλεξάνδρῳ τῷ δεδηλωμένῳ ἐπισκόπῳ ἀνατέθεικεν.
 from what has been writtento you), were enabled1by οthers who studied this very Gospel, that is, by the successors of thosewho began it, whom we call Docetae2( for most of theideas belong to their teaching)— using the material suppliedby were enabled to go through it and discover that the most part indeed was in accordance with the true teaching of the Saviour, but that somethings were added, which also we place below for your benefit.
” XIII.
 Such are the writings of Serapion.
 But of Clement the Stromateis, all the eight books, are preserved with us, upon whiehhe bestowed the following title:
“ Titus Flavius Clement's Stromateis3 of GnosticMemoirs according totheTrue Philosophy”;
 and οf equal number with these are his books entitled Hypotyposeis, 4 in whichhe mentions Ρantaenusby name as his teaeher, and has set forth his interpretations of the scriptures and his traditons.
 There is alsoa book of his, the Exhorlalion to the Greeks, 5 and the three books of the work entitled Paedagogus, and Who is the Rich Man that is being Saved? 5( such is the titleof another bookof his), and the treatiseΟnthe Pascha,and discourses Οn Fasting and Οn Slander, and the Exhortation to Endurance, or Tothe Recently Baptized,5 and the bookentitled the Ecclesiastical Cannon, or Againstthe Judaizers,6 which he has dedicated to Alexander, the bishop mentioned above.
 7 the bedelothes.
 Hence works ofa miscellaneous character were thus entitled, not οnlyby Clement,but also by Plutarch and Origen( see 24.
 3).
 Ἐν μὲν οὖν τοῖς Στρωματεῦσιν οὐ μόνον τῆς θείας κατάτρωσιν πεποίηται γραφῆς, ἀλλὰ καὶ τῶν παρ’ Ἔλλησιν, εἴ τι ἄρα ὠφέλιμον ἐδόκει καὶ αὐτοῖς εἰρῆσθαι, μνημονεύει τῶν τε παρὰ τοῖς πολλοῖς δογμάτων, τὰ Ἑλλήνων ὁμοῦ καὶ τὰ βαρβάρων ἀναπτύσσων καὶ ἔτι τὰς τῶν αἱρεσιαρχῶν ψευδοδοξίας εὐθύνων, ἱστορίαν τε πολλὴν ἐξαπλοῖ, ὑπόθεσιν ἡμῖν πολυμαθοῦς παρέχων παιδείας.
 τούτοις ἅπασιν καταμίγνυσιν καὶ τὰ Φιλοσόφων δόγματα, ὅθεν εἰκότως κατάλληλον τῆ ὑποθέσει καὶ τὴν προγραφὴν τῶν Στρωματέων πεποίηται.
 κέχρηται δ’ ἐν αὐτοῖς καὶ ταῖς ἀπὸ τῶν ἀντιλεγομένων γραφῶν μαρτυρίαις, τῆς τε λεγομένης Σολομῶνος Σοφίας καὶ τῆς Ἰησοῦ τοῦ Σιρὰχ καὶ τῆς πρὸς Ἑβραίους ἐπιστολῆς τῆς τε Βαρναβᾶ καὶ Κλήμεντος καὶ Ἰούδα, μνημονεύει τε τοῦ πρὸς Ἕλληνας Τατιανοῦ λόγου καὶ Κασσιανοῦ ὡς καὶ αὐτοῦ χρονογραφίαν πεποιημένου, ἔτι μὴν Φίλωνος καὶ’ Αριατοβούλου Ἰωσήπου τε καὶ Δημητρίου καὶ Εὐπολέμου, Ἰουδαίων συγγραφέων, ὡς ἄν τούτων ἁπάντων ἐγγράφως πρεσβύτερον τῆς παρ’ Ἕλλησιν ἀρχαιογονίας Μωυσέα τε καὶ τὸ Ἰουδαίων γένος ἀποδειξάντων.
 καὶ ἄλλης δὲ πλείστης χρηστομαθείας ἔμπλεῳ οἱ δηλούμενοι τυγχάνουσιν τοῦ ἀνδρὸς λόγοι·
 ὧν ἐν τῷ πρώτῳ περὶ ἑαυτοῦ δηλοῖ ὡς ἔγγιστα τῆς τῶν ἀποστόλων γενομένου διαδοχῆς, ὑπισχνεῖταιδ’ ἐν αὐτοῖς καὶ εἰς τὴν Γένεσιν ὑπομνηματιεῖσθαι.
 Καὶ ἐν τῷ λόγῳ δὲ αὐτοῦ τῷ Περὶ τοῦ πάσχα ἐκβιασθῆναι ὁμολογεῖ πρὸς τῶν ἑταίρων ἃς ἔτυχεν Νow in the Stromateis he has composeda patchwork, not onlyofthe divine Scripture, but of the writings of the Greeks as well, if he thought that they also had said anything useful, and he mentions opinions from many sources, explaining Greekand barbarian alike, and moreover sifts the false opinions οf the heresiarchs;
 and unfolding much history he gives usa work of great erudition.
 With all these he mingles also the opinions of philosophers, and so he has suitably made the title of the Stromateis to correspond to the work itself.
 Αnd in them he has also madeuseof testimonies fromthe disputed writings, the known known as the Wisdom of Solomon, and the Wisdom of JesustheSon of sirach, and the Epistletothe Hebrews,and thoseof Barnabas,and Clement, and Jude;
 and he mentions Tatian's book Against the Greeks, and Cassian, sinee he also had composeda chronography,1 and moreover Philo and Aristobulus and Josephus and Demetrius and Eupolemus, Jewish writers, in thattheywould show,all of them, in writing, that Moses and the Jewish race went back further in their origins than the Greeks.
 2 Αnd the books of Clement, of which we are speaking, are full of much other useful learning.
 Ιn the first of these he shows with reference to himself that he came very near to the successors of the Αpostles3;
 and he promises in them also to write a commentary on Genesis.
 4 Αnd in his book Οn the Pascha he professes that he was compelled by his companions to commit to παρὰ τῶν ἀρχαίων πρεσβυτέρων ἀκηκοὼς παραδόσεις γραφῆ τοῖς μετὰ ταῦτα παραδοῦναι, μέμνηται δ’ ἐν αὐτῷ Μελίτωνος καὶ Εἰρηναίου καί τινων ἑτέρων, ὧν καὶ τὰς διηγήσεις τέθειται.
 XIV.
 Ἐν δὲ ταῖς Ὑποτυπώσεσιν ξυνελόντα εἰπεῖν πάσης τῆς ἐνδιαθήκου γραφῆς ἐπιτετμημένας πεποίηται διηγήσεις, μηδὲ τὰς ἀντιλεγομένας παρελθών, τὴν Ἰούδα λέγω καὶ τὰς λοιπὰς καθολικὰς ἐπιστολὰς τήν τε Βαρνάβα, καὶ τὴν Πέτρου λεγομένην Ἀποκάλυφιν.
 καὶ τὴν πρὸς Ἑβραίους δὲ ἐπιστολὴν Παύλου μὲν εἶναί φησιν, γεγράφθαι δὲ Ἑβραίοις Ἑβραικῇ φωνῇ, Λοῦκαν δὲ φιλοτίμως αὐτὴν μεθερμηνεύσαντα ἐκδοῦναι τοῖς Ἕλλησιν, ὅθεν τὸν αὐτὸν χρῶτα εὑρίσκεσθαι κατὰ τὴν ἑρμηνείαν ταύτης τε τῆς ἐπιστολῆς καὶ τῶν Πραξέων.
 μὴ προγεγράφθαι δὲ τὸ“ Παῦλος ἀπόστολος’’ εἰκότως·
“ Ἑβραίοις γάρ,’’ φησίν,·
“ ἐπιστέλλων πρόληψιν εἰληφόσιν κατ’ αὐτοῦ καὶ ὑποπτεύουσιν αὐτόν, συνετῶς πάνυ οὐκ ἐν ἀρχῇ ἀπέτρεφεν αὐτούς, τὸ ὄνομα θείς.
” Εἶτα ὑποβὰς ἐπιλέγει, ἤδη δέ, ὡς ὁ μακάριος ἔλεγεν πρεσβύτερος, ἐπεὶ ὁ κύριος, ἀπόστολος ὢν τοῦ παντοκράτορος, ἀπεστάλη πρὸς Ἑβραίους, διὰ μετριότητα ὁ Παῦλος, ὡς ἂν εἰς τὰ ἔθνη ἀπεσταλμένος, οὐκ ἐγγράφει ἑαυτὸν Ἑβραίων ἀπόστολον διά τε τὴν πρὸς τὸν κύριον τιμὴν διά τε τὸ ἐκ περιουσίας καὶ τοῖς Ἑβραίοις ἐπιστὲλλειν, ἐθνῶν κήρυκα ὄντα καὶ ἀπόστολον.
 ” Αὖθις δ’ ἐν τοῖς αὐτοῖς ὁ Κλήμης βιβλίοις περὶ τῆς τάξεως τῶν εὐαγγελίων παράδοσιν τῶν ἀνέκαθεν πρεσβυτέρων τέθειται, τοῦτον ἔχουσαν τὸν τρόπον.
 προγεγράφθαι ἔλεγεν τῶν εὐαγγελίων writing traditions that he had heard from the elders οf olden time, for the benefit or those that should come after;
 and he mentions in it Melito and Irenaeus and some others, Whose accounts also of the matter he has set down.
 XIV.
 Αnd in the Hypotyposeis,to speak briefly, he has given concise explanations of allthe Canonical scriptures, not passing over even the disputed writings,Ι mean the Epistleof Jude and the remaining Catholic Εpistles, and the Epistle of Barnabas, the Apocalypse known as Peter's.
 Αnd as for Εpistle tothe Hebrews,he says indeed that it is Paul's, but that it was written for Hebrews in the Ηebrew tongue, and that Luke, having carefully translated it, published it for the Greeks;
 hence, as aresultof this translation, the same complexion of style is found in this Epistle and in the Acts:
 but that the words“ Paul an apostle” were not prefixed.
 For, says he,“ in writing to Ηebrews who had conceived a prejudice against him and were suspicious of him, he very wisely did not repel them at the beginning by putting his name.
” Then lower down he adds:
“ But now, as the blessed elder used to say, since the Lord, being the apostle of the Αlmighty, was sent to the Hebrews, ΡauΙ, through modesty, since he had been sent to the Gentiles, does not inscribe himself as an apostle οf the Hebrews, both to give due deference to the Lord and because he wrote to the Ηebrews also out of his abundance, being a preacher and apostle of the Gentiles.
” Αnd againin the same booksClementhas inserteda tradition oftheprimitive elders with regard to the οrderοf the Gospels, as follows.
 Ηe Said that those τὰ περιέχοντα τὰς γενεαλογίας, τὸ δὲ κατὰ Μάρκον ταύτην ἐσχηκέναι τὴν οἰκονομίαν.
 τοῦ Πέτρου δημοσίᾳ ἐν ‘ Ρώμῃ κηρύξαντος τὸν λόγον καὶ πνεύματι τὸ εὐαγγέλιον ἐξειπόντος, τοὺς παρόντας, πολλοὺς ὄντας, παρακαλέσαι τὸν Μάρκον, ὡς ἂν ἀκολουθήσαντα αὐτῷ πόρρωθεν καὶ μεμνημένον τῶν λεχθέντων, ἀναγραφαὶ τὰ εἰρημένα·
 ποιήσαντα δέ, τὸ εὐαγγέλιον μεταδοῦναι τοῖς δεομένοις αὐτοῦ·
 ὅπερ ἐπιγνόντα τὸν Πέτρον προτρεπτικῶς μήτε κωλῦσαι μήτε προτρέψασθαι.
 αἰ.
 τὸν μέντοι Ἰωάννην ἔσχατον, συνιδόντα ὅτι τὰ σωματικὰ ἐν τοῖς εὐαγγελίοις δεδήλωται, προτραπέντα ὑπὸ τῶν γνωρίμων, πνεύματι θεοφορηθέντα πνευματικὸν ποιῆσαι εὐαγγέλιον.
 τοσαῦτα ὁ Κλήμης.
 Πάλιν δ’ ὁ δηλωθεὶς Ἀλέξανδρος τοῦ Κλήμεντος, ἅμα δὲ καὶ τοῦ Πανταίνου ἔν τινι πρὸς Ὠριγένην ἐπιστολῇ μνημονεύει, ὡς δὴ γνωρίμων αὐτῷ γενομένων τῶν ἀνδρῶν, γράφει δὲ οὕτως·
“ τοῦτο γὰρ καὶ θέλημα θεοῦ, ὡς οἶδας, γέγονεν ἵνα ἡ ἀπὸ προγόνων ἡμῖν φιλία μένη ἄσυλος, μᾶλλον δὲ θερμοτέρα ἦ καὶ βεβαιοτέρα.
 πατέρας γὰρ ἴσμεν τοὺς μακαρίους ἐκείνους τοὺς προοδεύσαντας, πρὸς οὓς μετ’ ὀλίγον ἐσόμεθα, Πάνταινον, τὸν μακάριον ἀληθῶς καὶ κύριον, καὶ τὸν ἱερὸν Κλήμεντα, κύριόν μου γενόμενον καὶ ὠφελήσαντά με, καὶ εἴ τις ἕτερος τοιοῦτος·
 δι’ ὧν ἀὲ ἐγνώρισα, τὸν κατὰ πάντα ἄριστον καὶ κύριόν μου καὶ ἀδελφόν.
” καὶ ταῦτα μὲν τοιαῦτα.
 Ὁ γέ τοι Ἀδαμάντιος( καὶ τοῦτο γὰρ ἦν τῷ Ωριγένει ὄνομα), Ζεφυρίνου κατὰ τούσδε τοὺς Gospels were first written which include the genealogies, but that the Gospel according to Mark came into being in this manner1 :
 When Ρeter had preached the word at Rome, and by the Spirit Ρroclaimed the Gospel, that those present,who were many, exhorted Mark, as one who had followed him fora long time and remembered whathad been spoken, to makea record of what was said;
 and thathe did this, and distributed the Gospel among those that asked him.
 Αnd that when the matter came to Ρeter’s knowledge he neither strongly forbade it nor urged it forward.
 But that John, last οf all, conscious that the outward2 facts had been forth in the Gospels, was urged οn by his disciples, and, divinely movedby the Spirit, composed a spiritual Gospel.
 This is Clement's account.
 Αnd again Αlexander, of whomwe spoke before, 3 mentions Clement, and at the same time also Pantaenus, in a certain letter to Origen, as men who had been known to him.
 Ηe writes as follows:
“ For this alsohas proved tobethe willofGod,as thou knowest, that the friendship that comestous from οur forefathersshouldremain unshaken,nay rather grow warmer and more stedfast.
 For we know as fathers those blessed ones whowent before us, with whom we shall be ere long:
 Pantaenus, truly blessed and my master, and the holy Clement, who wasmy master and profited me, and all others like them.
 Through theseI came to knowthee, who artthe best inall things,and my master and brother.
” do these matters stand.
 Now Αdamantius( for this alsowas Origen's name), when Zephyrinus was at that time ruling the church χρόνους τῆς Ῥωμαίων ἐκκλησίας ἡγουμένου, ἐπιδημῆσαι τῆ‘ Ρώμῃ καὶ αὐτός που γράφει, λέγων εὐξάμενος τὴν ἀρχαιοτάτην Ῥωμαίων ἐκκλησίαν ἰδεῖν”·
 ἔνθα οὐ πολὺ διατρίψας, ἐπάνεισιν εἰς τὴν Ἀλεξάνδρειαν, καὶ δὴ τὰ συνήθη τῆς κατηχήσεως ἐνταῦθα μετὰ πάσης ἐπλήρου σπουδῆς, Δημητρίου τῶν τῇδε ἐπισκόπου ἔτι τότε παρορμῶντος αὐτὸν καὶ μόνον οὐχὶ ἀντιβολοῦντος ἀόκνως τὴν εἰς τοὺς ἀδελφοὺς ὠφέλειαν ποιεῖσθαι.
 XV.
 ὃ δ’ ὡς ἑαυτὸν ἑώρα μὴ ἐπαρκοῦντα τῇ τῶν θείων βαθυτέρᾳ σχολῇ τῇ τε ἐξετάσει καὶ ἑρμηνείᾳ τῶν ἱερῶν γραμμάτων καὶ προσέτι τῆ τῶν προσιόντων κατηχήσει μηδ’ ἀναπνεῦσαι συγχωρούντων αὐτῷ, ἐφ’ ἑτέροις ἐξ ἕω καὶ μέχρις ἑσπέρας ἐπὶ παρ’ αὐτῷ διδασκαλεῖον φοιτώντων, διανείμας τὰ πλήθη, τὸν Ἡρακλᾶν τῶν γνωρίμων προκρίνας, ἔν τε τοῖς θείοις σπουδαῖον καὶ ἄλλως ὄντα λογιώτατον ἄνδρα καὶ φιλοσοφίας οὐκ ἄμοιρον, κοινωνὸν καθίστη τῆς κατηχήσεως, τῷ μὲν τὴν πρώτην τῶν ἄρτι στοιχειουμένων εἰσαγωγὴν ἐπιτρέψας, αὐτῷ δὲ τὴν τῶν ἐν ἕξει φυλάξας ἀκρόασιν.
 XVI.
 Τοσαύτη δὲ εἰσήγετο τῷ Ὠριγένει τῶν θείων λόγων ἀπηκριβωμένη ἐξέτασις, ὡς καὶ τὴν Ἐβραΐδα γλῶτταν ἐκμαθεῖν τάς τε παρὰ τοῖς Ἰουδαίοις φερομένας πρωτοτύπους αὐτοῖς Ἑβραίων στοιχείοις γραφὰς κτῆμα ἴδιον ποιήσασθαι ἀνιχνεῦσαί τε τὰς τῶν ἑτέρων παρὰ τοὺς ἑβδομήκοντα τὰς ἱερὰς γραφὰς ἑρμηνευκότων ἐκδόσεις καί τινας ἑτέρας παρὰ τὰς κατημαξευμένας ἑρμηνείας ἐναλλαττούσας, τὴν Ἀκύλου καὶ Συμμάχου καὶ Θεοδοτίωνος, ἐφευρεῖν, ἃς οὐκ οἶδ’ ὅθεν ἔκ τινωνofthe Romans, himself states in writing somewhere thathe stayed at Rome.
 Ηis words are:
“ Desiring to see the most ancient church of the Romans.
” Αfter spendingashort time there, he returnedto Αlexandria,and indeed continuedto fulfil in that cityhis customary work οf instructionwith all Ζeal, Demetrius,the bishop ofthe people there, still exhorting and wellnigh entreating him to ply diligently his task of usefulness for the brethren.
 XV.
 But when he saw that he was becoming unable for the deeper study of diving things, namely,the examination and translationofthe sacred writings, and in addition for the instruction of those who were coming to him and did not give him time to breathe( for one batch of pupils after another kept frequenting from morn to night his lecture- room), he madea division ofthe numbers.
 seleeting Heraclas fromamong his pupils,a man who was Ζealous of divine things, and, as well,a very learned person and notyroin philosophy, he gave hima share in the task of instruction, assigning to him the preliminary studies οf those whowere just learning their elements, and reserving for himself the teaching of the experienced pupils.
 XVI.
 Αnd so accurate was the examination that Origen brought to bear upon the divine books, that he even made a thorough study of the Ηebrew tongue, and got into his own Ρossession the original writings in the actual Ηebrew characters, which were extant among the Jews.
 Thus, too, he traced the editions οf the other translators οf the sacred writings besides the Seventy;
 and besides the beaten track of translations, that of Αquila and Symmachus and Theodotion, he discovered certain others, which were used μυχῶν τὸν πάλαι λανθανούσας χρόνον ἀνιχνεύσας προήγαγεν εἰς φῶς·
 ἐφ’ ὧν διὰ τὴν ἀδηλότητα, τίνος ἄρ εἶεν οὐκ εἰδώς, αὐτὸ τοῦτο μόνον ἐπεσημήνατο ὡς ἄρα τὴν μὲν εὕροι ἐν τῆ πρὸς Ἀκτίοις Νικοπόλει, τὴν δὲ ἐν ἑτέρῳ τοιῷδε τόπῳ·
 ἔν γε μὴν τοῖς Ἑξαπλοῖς τῶν Ψαλμῶν μετὰ τὰς ἐπισήμους τέσσαρας ἐκδόσεις οὐ μόνον πέμπτην, ἀλλὰ καὶ ἕκτην καὶ ἑβδόμην παραθεὶς ἑρμηνείαν, ἐπὶ μιᾶς αὖθις σεσημείωται ὡς ἐν Ἱεριχοῖ εὑρημένης ἐν πίθῳ κατὰ τοὺς χρόνους Ἀντωνίνου τοῦ υἱοῦ Σευήρου.
 ταύτας δὲ ἁπάσας ἐπὶ ταὐτὸν συναγαγὼν διελών τε πρὸς κῶλον καὶ ἀντιπαραθεὶς ἀλλήλαις μετὰ καὶ αὐτῆς τῆς Ἑβραίων σημειώσεως τὰ τῶν λεγομένων Ἑξαπλῶν ἡμῖν ἀντίγραφα καταλέλοιπεν, ἰδίως τὴν Ἀκύλου καὶ Συμμάχου καὶ Θεοδοτίωνος ἔκδοσιν ἅμα τῆ τῶν ἑβδομήκοντα ἐν τοῖς Τετρασσοῖς ἐπισκευάσας.
 XVII.
 Τῶν γε μὴν ἑρμηνευτῶν αὐτῶν δὴ τούτων ἰατέον Ἐβιωναῖον τὸν Σύμμαχον γεγονέναι·
 αἵρεσις δέ ἐστιν ἡ τῶν Ἐβιωναίων οὕτω καλουμένη τῶν τὸν Χριστὸν ἐξ Ἰωσὴφ καὶ Μάριας γεγονέναι φασκόντων φίλον τε ἄνθρωπον ὑπειληφότων αὐτὸν καὶ τὸν νόμον χρῆναι Ἰουδαϊκώτερον φυλάττειν ἀπισχυριζομένων, ὥς που καὶ ἐκ τῆς πρόσθεν ἰατορίας ἔγνωμεν.
 καὶ ὑπομνήματα δὲ τοῦ Συμμάχου εἰς ἔτι νῦν φέρεται, ἐν οἷς δοκεῖ πρὸς τὸ κατὰ Ματθαῖον ἀποτεινόμενος εὐαγγέλιον τὴν δεδηλωμένην αἵρεσιν κρατύνειν.
 ταῦτα δὲ ὁ Ὠριγένης μετὰ καὶ ἄλλων εἰς τὰς γραφὰς in turn, which, after lying hidden fora long time, he traced and brought to light,Ι know not from what recesses.
 With regard to these, on accountof their obscurity( not knowing whosein the World they were)he merely indicated this:
 that the onehefound at Nicopolis, near Αetium, and the other in such another ρlace.
 Αt any rate, in the Hexapla1 of the afterthefour well- known editions, he placed beside them not only a fifth but alsoa sixth anda seventh translation;
 and in the case of one of these he has indicated again that it was found at Jericho ina jar inthetime of Antoninustheson of Severus.
 Αll these he brought together, dividing them into clauses and placing them one over against the other, together with the actual Hebrew text;
 and so he has left us the copies of the Hexapla, as itis called.
 He madea further separate arrangement of the edition Οf Aquila and Symmachus and Theodotion together with thatof the Seventy, in the Tetrapla.
 2 XVII.
 Now as regards these same translators it is to be noted that Symmachus wasan Ebionite.
 Those who belong to the heresy of the Ebionites, as it is called, affirm that the Christ was born of Joseph and Μary, and suppose Him to bea mere man,and strongly maintain that the law ought to be keptina morestrictlyJewish fashion,as also wesawsomewhere from the foregoing history.
 3 Αnd too of Symmachus are still extant, in which, by his opposition to the Gospel according to Matthew, he seems to hold the above- mentioned heresy.
 These, along with other interpretations of the Scriptures by ἑρμηνειῶν τοῦ Συμμάχου σημαίνει παρὰ Ἰουλιανῆς τινος εἰληφέναι, ἢν καί φησιν παρ’ αὐτοῦ Συμμάχου τὰς βίβλους διαδέξασθαι.
 XVIII.
 Ἐν τούτῳ καὶ Ἀμβρόσιος τὰ τῆς Οὐαλεντίνου φρονῶν αἱρέσεως, πρὸς τῆς ὑπὸ Ὠριγένους πρεσβευομένης ἀληθείας ἐλεγχθεὶς καὶ ὡς ἂν ὑπὸ φωτὸς καταυγασθεὶς τὴν διάνοιαν, τῷ τῆς ἐκκΛησιαστικῆς ὀρθοδοξίας προστίθεται λόγῳ.
 καὶ ἄλλοι δὲ πλείους τῶν ἀπὸ παιδείας, τῆς περὶ τὸν Ὠριγένην φήμης πανταχόσε βοωμένης, ὡς αὐτόν, πεῖραν τῆς ἐν τοῖς ἱεροῖς λόγοις ἱκανότητος τἀνδρὸς ληψόμενοι·
 μυρίοι δὲ τῶν αἱρετικῶν φιλοσόφων τε τῶν μάλιστα ἐπιφανῶν οὐκ ὀλίγοι διὰ σπουδῆς αὐτῷ προσεῖχον, μόνον οὐχὶ πρὸς τοῖς θείοις καὶ τὰ τῆς ἔξωθεν φιλοσοφίας πρὸς αὐτοῦ παιδευόμενοι.
 εἰσῆγέν τε γὰρ δάους εὐφυῶς ἔχοντας ἑώρα, καὶ ἐπὶ τὰ φιλόσοφα μαθήματα, γεωμετρίαν καὶ ἀριθμητικὴν καὶ τἄλλα προπαιδεύματα παραδιδοὺς εἴς τε τὰς αἱρέσεις τὰς παρὰ τοῖς φιλοσόφοις προάγων καὶ τὰ παρὰ τούτοις συγγράμματα διηγούμενος ὑπομνηματιζόμενός τε καὶ θεωρῶν εἰς ἕκαστα, ὥστε μέγαν καὶ παρ’ αὐτοῖς Ἕλλησιν φιλόσοφον τὸν ἄνδρα κηρύττεσθαι·
 πολλοὺς δὲ καὶ τῶν ἰδιωτικωτέρων ἐνῆγεν ἐπὶ τὰ ἐγκύκλια γράμματα, οὐ μικρὰν αὐτοῖς ἔσεσθαι φάσκων ἐξ ἐκείνων ἐπιτηδειότητα εἰς τὴν τῶν θείων γραφῶν θεωρίαν τε καὶ παρασκευήν, ὅθεν μάλιστα καὶ ἑαυτῷ ἀναγκαίαν ἡγήσατο τὴν περὶ τὰ κοσμικὰ καὶ φιλόαοφα μαθήματα ἄσκησιν.
 XIX.
 Μάρτυρες δὲ καὶ τῆς περὶ ταῦτα αὐτοῦ κατορθώσεως αὐτῶν Ἑλλήνων οἱ κατ’ αὐτὸν ἠκμακότες φιλόσοφοι, ὧν ἐν συγγράμμασιν πολλὴν Symmachus, Οrigen indicates that he had received froma certain Juliana, who, he says, inherited in her turn the books from Symmachus himself.
 XVIII.
 Αt this time also Ambrose, who held the views of the heresy of Valentinus,1 was refuted truth as presentedby Origen, and, as if his mind were illuminated by light, gave his adhesion to the true doctrine as taught by the Church.
 And many other cultured persons, since Origen's fame wasnoisedabroad everywhere, came to him to make trial οf the man's sufficiency in the sacred books.
 Αnd numbers of the heretics, and nota few ofthemostdistinguished philosophers, gave earnest heed to him, and, one might almost say, were instructed by him in secular philosophy as well as in divine things.
 For he used to introduce also to the study of philosophy as many as he saw were naturally gifted, imparting geometryand arithmetic and theοtherpreliminary subjects, and then leading them on to the systems which arefound among philosophers, giving a detailed account of their treatises commenting upon and examining into each, so that themanwas proclaimed asa great philosopher even among the Greeks themselves.
 Αnd many persons also of a more ignorant character he urged to take up the ordinary elementary studies, declaring that they would derive no small advantage from these when they came to examine and study the drvine Scriptures.
 For this reason he deemed especially necessary even for himselfa training in secular and philosophic studies.
 XIX.
 Νow, as witnesses also to his achievements in this direction, we have the Greek philosophers themselves who flourished in his day, in whose treatises μνήμην εὕρομεν τοῦ ἀνδρός, τοτὲ μὲν αὐτῷ προσφωνούντων τοὺς ἑαυτῶν λόγους, τοτὲ δὲ ὡς διδασκάλῳ εἰς ἐπίκρισιν τοὺς ἰδίους ἀναφερόντων πόνους.
 τί δεῖ ταῦτα λέγειν, ὅτε καὶ ὁ καθ’ ἡμᾶς ἐν Σικελίᾳ καταστὰς Πορφύριος συγγράμματα καθ’ ἡμῶν ἐνστησάμενος καὶ δι’ αὐτῶν τὰς θείας γραφὰς διαβάλλειν πεπειραμένος τῶν τε εἰς αὐτὰς ἐξηγησαμένων μνημονεύσας, μηδὲν μηδαμῶς φαῦλον ἔγκλημα τοῖς δόγμασιν ἐπικαλεῖν δυνηθείς, ἀπορίᾳ λόγων ἐπὶ τὸ λοιδορεῖν τρέπεται καὶ τοὺς ἐξηγητὰς ἐνδιαβάλλειν, ὧν μάλιστα τὸν Ὠριγένην·
 ὃν κατὰ τὴν νέαν ἡλικίαν ἐγνωκέναι φήσας, διαβάλλειν μὲν πειρᾶται, συνιστῶν δὲ ἄρα τὸν ἄνδρα ἐλάνθανεν, τὰ μὲν ἐπαληθεύων, ἐν οἷς οὐδ’ ἑτέρως αὐτῷ λέγειν ἦν δυνατόν, τὰ δὲ καὶ ψευδόμενος, ἐν οἷς λήσεσθαι ἐνόμιζεν, καὶ τοτὲ μὲν ὡς Χριστιανοῦ κατηγορῶν, τοτὲ δὲ τὴν περὶ τὰ φιλόσοφα μαθήματα ἐπίδοσιν αὐτοῦ διαγράφων.
 Ἄκουε δ’ οὖν ἅ φησιν κατὰ λέξιν·
 “ τῆς δὴ μοχθηρίας τῶν Ἰουδαϊκῶν γραφῶν οὐκ ἀπόστασιν, λύσιν δέ τινες εὑρεῖν προθυμηθέντες, ἐπ’ ἐξηγήσεις ἐτράποντο ἀσυγκλώστους καὶ ἀναρμόστους τοῖς γεγραμμένοις, οὐκ ἀπολογίαν μᾶλλον ὑπὲρ τῶν ὀθνείων, παραδοχὴν δὲ καὶ ἔπαινον τοῖς οἰκείοις φερούσας.
 αἰνίγματα γὰρ τὰ φανερῶς παρὰ Μωυσεῖ λεγόμενα εἶναι κομπάσαντες καὶ ἐπιθειάσαντες ὡς θεσπίσματα πλήρη κρυφίων μυστηρίων διά τε τοῦ τύφου τὸ κριτικὸν τῆς ψυχῆς καταγοητεύσαντες, ἐπάγουσιν ἐξηγήσεις.
” Εἶτα μεθ’ ἕτερά φησιν·
 “ ὁ δὲ τρόπος τῆς we find frequent mention οf the man.
 sometimes they would dedicate their books to him, sometimes submit their οwn labours tohimfor judgement, as toa master.
 But why needone say this, when even Porphry, 1 who settled in ourdayin Sicily,treatises against us, attempting in them to slanderthe sacred Scriptures, and mentioned those who had given their interpretations of them? Αnd since he could not by any means bring any base charge against our opinions, for lack of argument he turned to deride and slander their interpreters also, and among these origen especially.
 Ηe says thatin his early manhoodhe had known him;
 and he tries to slander the man, but unknown to himself really commends him, telling the truth in some cases, where he could not speak otherwise, in οthers telling lies, where he thought he could escape detection;
 and at one time accusing himasa Christian, at another describinghis devotion to the study οf philosophy.
 But hear the very words thathe uses:
“ Some, in their eagerness to find an explanation of the wickedness of the Jewish writings rather than give them up, had recourse to interpretations that are incompatible and do not harmonize with what has been offering not so mucha defence of what was outlandish as commendationand praise of their own work.
 For they boast that the things said plainly byMosesare riddles, treating them as divine oracles full of hidden mysteries, and bewitching the mental judgement by their own pretentious obscurity;
 and so they put forward their interpretations.
” Then,after other remarks, he says:
“ But this ἀτοπίας ἐξ ἀνδρὸς ᾧ κἀγὼ κομιδῆ νέος ὢν ἔτι ἐντετύχηκα, σφόδρα εὐδοκιμήσαντος καὶ ἔτι δι’ ὧν καταλέλοιπεν συγγραμμάτων εὐδοκιμοῦντος, παρειλήφθω, Ὠριγένους, οὗ κλέος παρὰ τοῖς παρειλήφθω, τούτων τῶν λόγων μέγα διαδέδοται.
 ἀκροατὴς γὰρ οὗτος Ἀμμωνίου τοῦ πλείστην ἐν τοῖς καθ’ ἡμᾶς χρόνοις ἐπίδοσιν ἐν φιλοσοφίᾳ ἐσχηκότος γεγονώς, εἰς μὲν τὴν τῶν λόγων ἐμπειρίαν πολλὴν παρὰ τοῦ διδασκάλου τὴν ὠφέλειαν ἐκτήσατο, εἰς δὲ τὴν ὀρθὴν τοῦ βίου προαίρεσιν τὴν ἐναντίαν ἐκείνῳ πορείαν ἐποιήσατο.
 Ἀμμώνιος μὲν γὰρ χριστιανὸς ἐν Χριαριανοῖς ἀνατραφεὶς τοῖς γονεῦσιν, ὅτε τοῦ φρονεῖν καὶ τῆς φιλοσοφίας ἥψατο, εὐθὺς πρὸς τὴν κατὰ νόμους πολιτείαν μετεβάλετο, Ὠριγένης δὲ Ἕλλην ἐν Ἕλλησιν παιδευθεὶς λόγοις, πρὸς τὸ βάρβαρον ἐξώκειλεν τόλμημα·
 ᾧ δὴ φέρων αὐτόν τε καὶ τὴν ἐν τοῖς λόγοις ἕξιν ἐκαπήλευσεν, κατὰ μὲν τὸν βίον Χριστιανῶς ζῶν καὶ παρανόμως, κατὰ δὲ τὰς περὶ τῶν πραγμάτων καὶ τοῦ θείου δόξας ἑλληνίζων τε καὶ τὰ Ἑλλήνων τοῖς ὀθνείοις ὑποβαλλόμενος μύθοις.
 συνῆν τε γὰρ ἀεὶ τῷ Πλάτωνι, τοῖς τε Νουμηνίου καὶ Κρονίου Ἀπολλοφάνους τε καὶ Λογγίνου καὶ Μοδεράτου Νικομάχου τε καὶ τῶν ἐν τοῖς Πυθαγορείοις ἐλλογίμων ἀνδρῶν ὡμίλει συγγράμμασιν, ἐχρῆτο δὲ καὶ Χαιρήμονος τοῦ Στωϊκοῦ Κορνούτου τε ταῖς βίβλοις, παρ’ ὧν τὸν μεταληπτικὸν τῶν παρ’ Ἕλλησιν μυστηρίων γνοὺς τρόπον ταῖς Ἰουδαϊκαῖς προσῆψεν γραφαῖς.
” Ταῦτα τῷ Πορφυρίῳ κατὰ τὸ τρίτον σύγγραμμα τῶν γραφέντων αὐτῷ κατὰ Χριστιανῶν εἴρηται, ἐπαληθεύσαντι μὲν περὶ τῆς τἀνδρὸς ἀσκήσεως kind οf absurdity must be traced toa man whomImet whenI was still quite young, who hada great reputation, and still holds it, because of the writingshehasleft behind him,I mean Oregen, whose fame has been widespread among the teachers of this kind of learning.
 For this man was a hearer of Ammonius,1 who hadthe greatest proficiencyin philosophy in our day;
 and so far as a grasp οf knowledgewas concerned he owed muchto his master, but as regards the right choice in life he took the opposite road to him.
 For Αnnnonius was a Christian, brought upin Christian doctrineby his parents, yet, when he began to think and study philosophy, he immediately changed his way οf life conformably to the laws;
 but Origen,a Greek educated in Greek learning, drove headlong towards barbarian recklessness;
 and making straight for this he hawked himself and his literary skill about;
 and while his manner of life was christian and contrary to the law, in his opinions about material things and the Deity he played the Greek, and introduced Greek ideas into foreign fables.
 For he was always consorting with Ρlatο, and was conversant with the writings οf Numenius and Cronius, Apollophanes and Longinus and Moderatus, Nicomachus and the distinguished men among the Pythagoreans;
 and he used also the books of Chaeremon the Stoic and Cornutus, from whom he learnt the fingurative interpretation,as employed inthe Greek mysteries, and appliedit to the Jewish writings.
” These statements were made by Porphyry in the third treatise of his writings against Christians.
 Αnd while he tells the truth about the man's trainingand καὶ πολυμαθείας, ψευσαμένῳ δὲ σαφῶς( τί γὰρ οὐκ ἔμελλεν ὁ κατὰ χριστιανῶν;
)·
 ἐν οἷς αὐτὸν μέν φησιν ἐξ Ἑλλήνων μετατεθεῖσθαι, τὸνδ’ Ἀμμώνιον ἐκ βίου τοῦ κατὰ θεοσέβειαν ἐπὶ τὸν ἐθνικὸν τρόπον ἐκπεσεῖν.
 τῷ τε γὰρ Ὠριγένει τὰ τῆς κατὰ χριστὸν διδασκαλίας ἐκ προγόνων ἐσῴζετο, ὡς καὶ τὰ τῆς πρόσθεν ἱστορίας ἐδήλου, τῷ τε Ἀμμωνίῳ τὰ τῆς ἐνθέου φιλοσοφίας ἀκέραια καὶ ἀδιάπτωτα καὶ μέχρις ἐσχάτης τοῦ βίου διέμενεν τελευτῆς, ὥς που καὶ οἱ τἀνδρὸς εἰς ἔτι νῦν μαρτυροῦσι πόνοι, δι’ ὧν κατέλιπε συγγραμμάτων παρὰ τοῖς πλείστοις εὐδοκιμοῦντος, ὥσπερ οὖν καὶ ὁ ἐπιγεγπαρμμένος Περὶ τῆς Μωυσέως καὶ Ἰησοῦ συμφωνίας καὶ ὅσοι ἄλλοι παρὰ τοῖς φιλοκάλοις εὕρηνται.
 Ταῦτα μὲν οὖν εἰς παράστασιν ἐκκείσθω τῆς τε τοῦ ψευδηγόρου συκοφαντίας καὶ τῆς Ὠριγένους καὶ περὶ τὰ Ἑλλήνων μαθήματα πολυπειρίας, περὶ ἧς πρός τινας μεμψαμένους αὐτῷ διὰ τὴν περὶ ἐκεῖνα σπουδὴν ἀπολογούμενος, ἐν ἐπιστολῇ τινι ταῦτα γράφει·
 “ ἐπεὶ δὲ ἀνακειμένῳ μοι τῷ λόγῳ, τῆς φήμης διατρεχούσης περὶ τῆς ἕξεως ἡμῶν, προσῄεσαν ὁτὲ μὲν αἱρετικοί, ὁτὲ δὲ οἱ ἀπὸ τῶν Ἑλληνικῶν μαθημάτων καὶ μάλιστα τῶν ἐν φιλοσοφίᾳ, ἔδοξεν ἐξετάσαι τά τε τῶν αἱρετικῶν δόγματα καὶ τὰ ὑπὸ τῶν φιλοσόφων περὶ ἀληθείας λέγειν ἐπαγγελλόμενα.
 τοῦτο δὲ πεποιήκαμεν μιμησάμενοί τε τὸν πρὸ ἡμῶν πολλοὺς ὠφελήσαντα Πάνταινον, οὐκ ὀλίγην ἐν ἐκείνοις ἐσχηκότα παρασκευήν, καὶ τὸν νῦν ἐν τῷ πρεσβυτερίῳ καθεζόμενον Ἀλεξανδρέων Ἡρακλᾶν, ὅντινα εὗρον παρὰ erudition, he cleariy lies( for whatisthe opponent of Christians not prepared to do?) where he says that Origen came overfromthe Greeks,and that Ammonius lapsed froma godly life into paganism.
 For Οrigen kept safely the Christian teaching which he had from his parents, as the hitory above made clear1;
 and Ammonius maintained his inspired philosophy pure and unshaken right up to the very end of his life.
 2 To this fact the man ' s works witness to the present day, and the widespread fame thathe owes to the writingshe left behindhim, as, for example, that entitled on the Harmony of Moses and Jesus, and all the other works that are to be found in the possession of lovers of literature.
 Let these things be stated to prove at once the false one's calumny and Origen's great knowledgeofGreek learning.
 With regard to such learning also he writes as follows ina certain epistle, defending himself against those who found fault with him for his zeal in that direction:
“ But asΙwas devoted tothe word,and the fame of οur proficiency was spreading abroad, there approachedme sometimes heretics, sometimes those conversant with Greek learning, and especially philosophy, andI thought it right to examine both the opinions of the heretics, and also the elaim that the philosophers make to speak concerning truth.
 Αnd in doing this we followed the exampleof Pantaenus, who, before us, was of assistance to many, and had acquired no small attainmentsin these matters, and also Heraclas, who now hasa seat inthepresbyteryof the Alexandrians, whomΙ τῷ διδασκάλῳ τῶν φιλοσόφων μαθημάτων, ἤδη πέντε ἔτεσιν αὐτῷ προσκαρτερήσαντα πρὶν ἢ ἐμὲ ἄρξασθαι ἀκούειν ἐκείνων τῶν λόγων·
 δι’ ὃν καὶ πρότερον κοινῇ ἐσθῆτι χρώμενος ἀποδυσάμενος καὶ φιλόσοφον ἀναλαβὼν σχῆμα μέχρι τοῦ δεῦρο τηρεῖ βιβλία τε Ἑλλήνων κατὰ δύναμιν οὐ παύεται φιλολογῶ.
” καὶ ταῦτα μὲν αὐτῷ περὶ τῆς Ἑλληνικῆς ἀσκήσεως ἀπολογουμένῳ εἴρηται·
 κατὰ τοῦτον δὲ τὸν χρόνον ἐπ’ Ἀλεξανδρείας αὐτῷ τὰς διατριβὰς ποιουμένῳ ἐπιστάς τις τῶν στρατιωτικῶν ἀνεδίδου γράμματα Δημητρίῳ τε τῷ τῆς παροικίας ἐπισκόπῳ καὶ τῷ τότε τῆς Αἰγύπτου ἐπάρχῳ παρὰ τοῦ τῆς Ἀραβίας ἡγουμένου, ὡς ἂν μετὰ σπουδῆς ἁπάσης τὸν Ὠριγένην πέμψοιεν κοινωνήσοντα λόγων αὐτῷ.
 καὶ δὴ ἀφικνεῖται ἐπὶ τὴν Ἀραβίαν·
 οὐκ εἰς μακρὸν δὲ τὰ τῆς ἀφίξεως εἰς πέρας ἀγαγών, αὖθις ἐπὶ τὴν Ἀλεξάνδρειαν ἐπανῄει.
 χρόνου δὲ μεταξὺ διαγενομένου, οὐ σμικροῦ κατὰ τὴν πόλιν ἀναρριπισθέντος πολέμου, ὑπεξελθὼν τῆς Ἀλεξανδρείας, ᾔει μὲν ἐπὶ Παλαιστίνης, ἐν Καισαρείᾳ δὲ τὰς διατριβὰς ἐποιεῖτο·
 ἔνθα καὶ διαλέγεσθαι τάς τε θείας ἑρμηνεύειν γραφὰς ἐπὶ τοῦ κοινοῦ τῆς ἐκκΛησίας οἱ τῇδε ἐπίσκοποι, καίτοι τῆς τοῦ πρεσβυτερίου χειροτονίας οὐδέπω τετυχηκότα, αὐτὸν ἠξίουν·
 δ’ καὶ αὐτὸ γένοιτ’ ἄν ἔκδηλον ἀφ’ ὧν περὶ τοῦ Δημητρίου γράφοντες Ἀλέξανδρος ὁ Ἱεροσολύμων ἐπίσκοπος καὶ Θεόκτιστος ὁ Καισαρείας ὧδέ πως ἀπολογοῦνται.
 “ προσέθηκεν δὲ τοῖς γράμμασιν ὅτι τοῦτο οὐδέποτε ἠκούσθη οὐδὲ νῦν γεγένηται, τὸ παρόντων ἐπισκόπων λαϊκοὺς ὁμιλεῖν, οὐκ οἶδ᾿ ὅπως προφανῶς und withtheteacher οf philosophy, and who had emained five years with him beforeI began to ttend his lectures.
 Αnd though he formerly wore dinary dress, on his teacher 's account heputit off and assumeda philosophic garb,1 which he keepsto this day, all the while studying Greek books as much as possible.
 ” This, indeed,is what he wrotein defence οf his Greek training.
 But at this time, while he was living at Alexandria, one of the militray appeared οn the scene and delivered letters to Demetrius, the bishopοf the community, and to the then governor of theprovinceοf Egypt, from the ruler of Αrabia, to theintent that heshouldsend Origen with all peed for an interview with him.
 Ηe duly arrivedin Arabia,but soon accomplishedthe object οfhis journey thither, and returned again to Αlexandria.
 But after the lapse of some time no small warfare2 broke out againin the city, and leaving Alexandria secretly he wentto Ρalestine and abode at Caesarea.
 And although he had not yet received ordination to the presbyterate, the bishops there requested him to discourse and expound the divine Scriptures publicly the church.
 That this isso is clearfrom what lexander, the bishopοf Jerusalem, and Theotistus, the bishopof Caesarea, write with reference Demetrius.
 They make their defence somewhat follows:
“ Αnd he added to his letter that suchaing had neverbeen heard οf, nor taken plaee itherto, that laymen should preach in the presencef bishops;
 thoughI do not know how he comes to οὐκ ἀληθῆ λέγων.
 ὅπου γοῦν εὑρίσκονται οἱ ἐπιτήδειοι πρὸς τὸ ὠφελεῖν τοὺς ἀδελφούς, καὶ παρακαλοῦνται τῷ λαῷ προσομιλεῖν ὑπὸ τῶν ἁγίων ἐπισκόπων, ὥσπερ ἐν Λαράνδοις Εὔελπις ὑπὸ Νέωνος καὶ ἐν Ἰκονίω Παυλῖνος ὑπὸ ὑπὸ καὶ ἐν Συνάδοις Θεόδωρος ὑπὸ Ἀττικοῦ, τῶν μακαρίων ἀδελφῶν.
 εἰκὸς δὲ καὶ ἐν ἄλλοις τόποις τοῦτο γίνεσθαι, ἡμᾶς δὲ μὴ εἰδέναι.
 ” Τοῦτον καὶ ἔτι νέος ὢν ὁ δηλούμενος ἀνὴρ οὐ πρὸς μόνων τῶν συνήθων, ἀλλὰ καὶ τῶν ἐπὶ ξένης ἐπισκόπων ἐτιμᾶτο τὸν τρόπον.
 ἀλλὰ γὰρ αὖθις τοῦ Δημητρίου διὰ γραμμάτων αὐτὸν ἀνακαλέσαντος δι’ ἀνδρῶν τε διακόνων τῆς ἐκκλησίας ἐπισπεύσαντος ἐπανελθεῖν εἰς τὴν Ἀλεξάνδρειαν, ίαν, ἀφικόμενος τὰς συνήθεις ἀπετέλει σπουδάς.
 XX.
 Ἤκμαζον δὲ κατὰ τοῦτο πλείους λόγιοι καὶ ἐκκλησιαστικοὶ ἄνδρες, ὧν καὶ ἐπιστολάς, ἃς πρὸς ἀλλήλους διεχάραττον, ἔτι νῦν σῳζομένας εὑρεῖν εὔπορον·
 αἰ καὶ εἰς ἡμᾶς ἐφυλάχθησαν ἐν τῆ κατὰ Αἰλίαν βιβλιοθήκῃ, πρὸς τοῦ τηνικάδε τὴν αὐτόθι διέποντος ἐκκλησίαν Ἀλεξάνδρου ἐπισκευασθείσῃ, ἀφ’ ἧς καὶ αὐτοὶ τὰς ὕλας τῆς μετὰ χεῖρας ὑποθέσεως ἐπὶ ταὐτὸν συναγαγεῖν δεδυνήμεθα.
 Τούτων βήρυλλος σὺν ἐπιστολαῖς καὶ συγγραμμάτων διαφόρους φιλοκαλίας καταλέλοιπεν, ἐπίσκοποςδ’ οὗτος ἦν τῶν κατὰ Βόστραν Ἀράβων·
 ὡσαύτως δὲ καὶ Ἱππόλυτος, ἑτέρας που καὶ αὐτὸς προεστὼς ἐκκλησίας.
 Ἧλθεν δὲ εἰς ἡμᾶς καὶ Γαΐου, λογιωτάτου say what is evidently not true.
 For instance, where ere are found persons suited to helpthe brethren,ey also are invited to preach to the people by the οly bishops, as, for example, in Laranda Εuelpis by eon, and inIconiumPaulinus by Celsus, and in ynnada Theodore by Αttieus, our brother ishops.
 Αnd it is likely that this thing happens in ther places also without οur knowing it.
” In thiswayhonour was paidtothe man of whomwe are speaking, while hewas still young, not onlyyhis fellow- countrymen but alsobythe bishops ina foreign land.
 But since Demetrius once again ecalled him by letter, and bymen who were deaconsf the Church urged him to come back with speed Alexandria, he retumed and continued to labour ith his accustomed zeal.
 XX.
 Νow there flourished at that time many earned churchemen, and the letters which they enned to οne another are still extant and easily ccessible.
 They have been preserved even to our ay in the libraryat Aelia, 1 equippedby Alexander, en ruling the church there;
 from which also we have been able ourselves to gather together the aterial for our present work.
 Of these Beryllus has left behind him, as wellas etters, varied and beautiful compositions.
 Ηe was ishop of the Arabians at Bostra.
 Αnd likewise also ippolytus, 2 who also presided over another church mewhere.
 Αnd there has reached us alsoaDialogue ofGaius, ἀνδρός, διάλογος, ἐπὶ Ῥώμης κατὰ Ζεφυρῖνον πρὸς Πρόκλον τῆς κατὰ Φρύγας αἱρέσεως ὑπερμαχοῦντα κεκινημένος·
 ἐν ᾧ τῶν δι’ ἐναντίας τὴν περὶ τὸ συντάττειν καινὰς γραφὰς προπέτειάν τε καὶ τόλμαν ἐπιστομίζων, τῶν τοῦ ἱεροῦ ἀποστόλου δεκατριῶν μόνων ἐπιστολῶν μνημονεύει, τὴν πρὸς Ἑβραίους μὴ συναριθμήσας ταῖς ἐπεὶ καὶ εἰς δεῦρο παρὰ Ῥωμαίων τισὶν οὐ νομίζεται τοῦ ἀποστόλου τυγχάνειν.
 XXI.
 Ἀλλὰ γὰρ Ἀντωνῖνον ἔτη βασιλεύσαντα ἑπτὰ καὶ μῆνας ἓξ Μακρῖνος διαδέχεται·
 τούτου δ’ ἐπ’ ἐνιαυτὸν διαγενομένου, αὖθις ἕτερος Ἀντωνῖνος τὴν Ῥωμαίων ἡγεμονίαν παραλαμβάνει·
 οὗ κατὰ τὸ πρῶτον ἔτος ὁ Ῥωμαίων ἐπίσκοπος Ζεφυρῖνος μεταλλάττει τὸν βίον, ὅλοις ὀκτωκαίδεκα διακατασχὼν ἔτεσιν τὴν λειτουργίαν·
 μεθ’ ὅγ’ Κάλλιστος τὴν ἐπισκοπὴν ἐγχειρίζεται, ὃς ἐπιβιώσας ἔτεσιν πέντε, Οὐρβανῷ τὴν λειτουργίαν καταλείπει.
 Αὐτοκράτωρ Ἀλέξανδρος ἐπὶ τούτοις διαδέχεται τὴν Ῥωμαίων ἀρχήν, ἐπὶ τέτταρσιν μόνοις ἔτεσιν Αντωνίνου διαγενομένου.
 ἐν τούτῳ δὲ καὶ ἐπὶ τῆς Ἀντιοχέων ἐκκλησίας Ἀκληπιάδην Φιλητὸς διαδέχεται.
 Τοῦ δ’ αὐτοκράτορος μήτηρ, Μαμαία τοὔνομα, εἰ καί τις ὤη θεοσεβεστάτη γυνή, τῆς Ὠριγένους πανταχόσε βοωμένης φήμης, ὡς καὶ μέχρι τῶν αὐτῆς ἐλθεῖν ἀκοῶν, περὶ πολλοῦ ποιεῖται τῆς τοῦ ἀνδρὸς θέας ἀξιωθῆναι καὶ τῆς ὑπὸ πάντων θαυμαζομένης περὶ τὰ θεῖα συνέσεως αὐτοῦ πεῖραν λαβεῖν.
 ἐπ’ Ἀντιοχείας δῆτα ἀνακαλεῖται·
 μετὰ στρατιωτικῆς δορυφορίας αὐτὸν ἀνακαλεῖται·
 παρ’a very learned person( which was set a- going at Rome in the time of Zephyrinus), with Ρroclus the champion οf the heresy of the Phrygians.
1 In which, curbing the recklessness and audacity of his opponents in composing new Scriptures, he mentions οnly thirteen epistles of the holy Apostle, not numberingthe Epistle tothe Ηebrews with the rest;
 seeing that even to this day among the Romans there are some Who do not consider it to bethe Apostle's.
 XXI.
 But indeed when Αntoninus had reigned for seven years and six months he was succeeded by Macrinus 2;
 and when he had eontinuedin office fora year, again another Antoninus3 received the Roman government.
 In the first yearof the latter, Zephyrinus, the bishop of the Romans,4 departed this life, having heldthe ministry for eighteen entire years.
 After him Callistus was entrusted with the episcopate;
 he survived five years and then left the ministry to Urban.
 Αfter this the Εmperor Αlexander suceeeded to the principateofthe Romans, Αntoninus having continued in office for only four years.
 Αt this time also Ρhiletus succeeded Asclepiades in the churchfthe Αntioehenes.
 Origen 's fame was now universal,so as to reach the ars οfthe Εmperor’s mother,Μamaea by name, a ligious woman if ever there was one.
 She set great tore οn securing a sightofthe man, and on testing at understanding οf divine things which was the onder of all.
 She was then staying at Αntioch, and moned him to herpresence with a military escort.
 ἢ χρόνον διατρίψας πλεῖατά τε δάα εἰς τὴν τού κυρίου δόξαν καὶ τῆς τοῦ θείου διδαακαλείου ἀρετῆς ἐπιδειξάμενος, ἐπὶ τὰς συνήθεις ἔσπευδεν διατριβάς.
 XXII.
 Τότε δῆτα καὶ Ἱππόλυτος αυντάττωι μετὰ πλείστων ἄλλων ὑπομνημάτων καὶ τὸ Περ τοῦ πάσχα πεποίηται αύγγραμμα, ἐν ᾧ τῶι χρόνων ἀναγραφὴν ἐκθέμενος καί τινα κανόνα ἑκκαιδεκαετηρίδος περὶ τοῦ πάαχα προθείς, ἐπ’ τὸ πρῶτον ἔτος αὐτοκράτορος Ἀλεξάνδρου τοὺς χρόνους περιγράφει·
 τῶν δὲ λοιπῶν αὐτοῦ συγ.
 τὰ εἰς ἡμᾶς ἐλθόντα ἐατὶν τάδε·
 Εἰς τὴν Ἑξαήμερον, Εἰς τὰ μετὰ τὴν Ἑξαήμερον Πρὸς Μαρκίωνα, Εἰς τὸ Ἆισμα, Εἰς μέρη τοι Ἰεζεκιήλ, Περὶ τοῦ πάσχα, Πρὸς ἁπάσας τὰς αἱρέσεις, πλεῖατά τε ἄλλα καὶ παρὰ πολλοῖς εὕροις ἂν αῳζόμενα.
 ΧΧΙΙΙ.
 Ἐξ ἐκείνου δὲ καὶ Ὠριγένει τῶν εἰς τὰς θείας γραφὰς ὑπομνημάτων ἐγίνετο ἀρχή Ἀμβροσίου παρορμῶντος αὐτὸν μυρίαις ὅσαις οὐ προτροπαῖς ταῖς διὰ λόγων καὶ παρακλήσεσιν αὐτὸ μόνον, ἀλλὰ καὶ ἀφθονωτάταις τῶν ἐπιτηδείων χορηγίαις.
 ταχυγράφοι τε γὰρ αὐτῷ πλείουςἠ ἑπτὰ τὸν ἀριθμὸν παρῆααν ὑπαγορεύοντι, χρόνοι, τεταγμένοις ἀλλήλους ἀμείβοντες, βιβλιογράφο τε οὐχ ἥττους ἅμα καὶ κόραις ἐπὶ τὸ καλλιγραφεῖν ἠακημέναις·
 ὧν ἁπάντων τὴν δέουσαν τῶν ἔπι·
 ἄφθονον περιουσίαν ὁ Ἀμβρόσιος πα εατήαατο·
 ναὶ μὴν καὶ ἐν τῆ περὶ τὰ θεῖα λόγω ἀακήαει τε καὶ σπουδῇ προθυμίαν ἄφατον αὐτᾷ αυνειαέφερεν, ἦ καὶ μάλιστα αὐτὸν προύτρεπεν ἐπὶ τὴν τῶν ὑπομνημάτων αύνταξιν.
 And when he had stayed with herfor some time, and shown her very many things that were for the glory of the Lord and the excellence ofthe divine teaching, he hastened backtohis accustοmed duties.
 XXII.
 Αt that very time alsο Ηippolytus, besides very many other memoirs, cοmposed the treatise οn Pascha in which he sets fοrth a register of the and puts fοrward a certain canon of a sixteenyears ars cycle for the Ρascha, using the first year οf the Emperοr Αlexander as a tenninus in measuring his(??) tes.
 of his other treatises the folloπing have ceached us:
 Οn the Hexaëmeron,1 On whatfollowedthe Hexaëmeron, Against Marcion, Οn the Sοng, On Parts of Εzekiel, Οn the Pascha, Against All the Heresies;
 and very many οthers also might be found preserved by many people.
 XXIII.
 starting Dom that time also Origen’s commentaries on the divineScriptureshad their beginning, at theinstigationοf Αmbrose,who not plied him with innumerable verbal exhortations encouragements, but also provided him untintingly what was necessary.
 For as he Hictated there were ready at hand mοre than seven chorthand- writers,who relieved each other at fixed and as many copyists, as well as girls skilled penmanship;
 for all of whom Αmbrose supplied without stint the necessary means.
 Νay further, he contributee to origena vast amount of zeal in the carnest study of the divine oracles, a zeal which more chan anything else acted as an incentiveto him tο compose his commentarieses.
 Τούτων δὲ οὕτως ἐχόντων, Οὐρβανὸν ἐπισκοπεύσαντα τῆς Ῥωμαίων ἐκκλησίας ἔτεαιν ὀκτὼ διαδέχεται Ποντιανός, τῆςδ’ Ἀντιοχέων μετὸ Φιλητὸν Ζέβεννος·
 καθ’ οὓς Ὠριγένης, ἐπειγούσης χρείας ἐκκλησιαστικῶν ἕνεκα πραγμάτων ἐπὶ τὴν Ἑλλάδα ατειλάμενος τὴν διὰ Παλαιστίνης, πρεσβείου χειροθεαίαν ἐν Καισαρείᾳ πρὸς τῶν τῇδε ἐπισκόπων ἀναλαμβάνει.
 τὰ μὲν οὖν ἐπὶ τούτῳ περὶ αὐτοῦ κεκινημένα τά τε ἐπὶ τοῖς κινηθεῖσι δεδογμένα τοῖς τῶν ἐκκλησιῶν προεστῶσιν ὅσα τε ἄλλα ἀκμάξων περὶ τὸν θεῖον εἰαενήνεκτα λόγον, ἰδίας δεόμενα συντάξεως, μετρίως ἐν τῷ δευτέρῳ ἧς ὑπὲρ αὐτοῦ πεποιήμεθα ἀπολογίας ἀνεγράψαμεν.
 ΧΧΙV.
 Ταῦτα δ’ ἐκείνοις δέοι ἄν ἐπιθεῖναι ὡς ἐν μὲν τῷ ἕκτῳ τῶν εἰς τὸ κατὰ Ἰωάννη, ἐξηγητικῶν σημαίνει τὰ πρότερα πέντε ἐπ’ Ἀλεξαωδρείας ἔτ’ ὄντα αὐτὸν αυντάξαι, τῆς δ’ εἰς τὸ πᾶν εὐαγγέλιον αὐτὸ δὴ τοῦτο πραγματείας μόνω δύο καὶ εἴκοσι εἰς ἡμᾶς περιῆλθον τόμοι·
 κατὰ δὲ τὸ ἔνατον τῶν Εἰς τὴν Γένεσιν( δώδεκα δ’ τὰ πάντα) οὐ μόνον τοὺς πρὸ τοῦ ἐνάτου δῆλοι ἐπὶ τῆς Ἀλεξανδρείας ὑπεμνηματίαθαι, καὶ εἰς τοὺς πρώτους δὲ πέντε καὶ εἴκοσι Ψαλμοὺς ἔτι τε τὰ εἰς τοὺς Θρήνους, ὧν εἰς ἡμᾶς ἐληλύθασι, τόμοι πέντε, ἐν οἷς μέμνηται καὶ τῶν Περὶ ἀναστάσεως·
 δύο δ’ ἐατὶν καὶ ταῦτα.
 οὐ μὴν ἀλλὸ καὶ τὰ Περὶ ἀρχῶν πρὸ τῆς ἀπ’ Ἀλεξανδρείας μεταναστάσεως γράφει, καὶ τοὺς ἐπιγεγραμμένους Στρωματεῖς, ὄντας τὸν ἀριθμὸν δέκα, ἐπὶ τῆς αὐτῆς πόλεως κατὰ τὴν Ἀλεξάνδρου συντάττε Such was the state of affairs when Pontianus succeeded Urban, who had been bishop of the chureh of the Romans for eight years, and Ζebennus came after Ρhiletus as bishopof the churchof the Antiochenes.
 In their day Οrigen journeyed to Greece through Palestine because of an urgent necessity in Chureh matters, and reveived the laying- on of hands for the presbyterate at Caesarea from the bishops there.
 The agitation that was set on foot concerning him on this aeeount, and the decistions made by those who presided over the chuiehes on the matters agitated, as well as the other contributions that he made as he was reachinghis prime to the study ofthe divine Word, requirea separate composition, and we have given a fairly full account of them in the seeond book of the Apology that we have written on his behalf.
 XXIV.
 But to that information it is necessary to add that in the sixthofhis Expositions οn the Gospel according to Johnhe indicates that he composedthe first five while he was still at Alexandria;
 but of this work on the whole of the selfsame Gospel only twenty- two tomes have comeour way.
 Αnd We must alsostate that intheninth of thoseOn Genesis( there are twelve in all)he shows thatnotonly were those beforethe ninth written at Alexandria, but also his commentary on the first twentyfive Psalms, and, as well those on Lamentations, of which there have come to us five tomes.
 In these he mentions also those Οn the Resurrection, of which there are two.
 Moreover he wrote his De Principiis before his removal from Alexandria, and he composed the books entitled Stromateis, ten in number, in the same city in the reign of Alexaner, as is shown βασιλείαν, ὡς καὶ τοῦτο ὁλόγραφοι δηλοῦσιν αὐτοῦ πρὸ τῶν τόμων ἐπισημειώσεις.
 XXV.
 τὸν μέν γε πρῶτον ἐξηγούμενος Ψαλμόν, ἔκθεαιν πεποίηται τοῦ τῶν ἱερῶν γραφῶν τῆς παλαιᾶς διαθήκης καταλόγου, ὧδέ πως γράφων κατὰ λέξιν·
“ οὐκ ἀγνοητέονδ’ εἶναι τὰς ἐνδιαθήκους βίβλους, ὡς Ἑβραῖοι παραδιδόασιν, δύο καὶ εἴκοσι, ὅαος ἀριθμὸς τῶν παρ’ αὐτοῖς στοιχείων ἐατίν. ’
 ’ Εἶτα μετά τινα ἐπιφέρει λέγων·
“ εἰαὶν δὲ αἱ εἴκοσι δύο βίβλοι καθ’ Ἑβραίους αἵδε·
 ἢ παρ’ ἡμῖν Γένεσις ἐπιυεγραμμένη, παρὰ παρὰδ’ Ἑβραίοις ἀπὸ τῆς ἀρχῆς τῆς βίβλου Βρησιθ, ὅπερ ἐστὶν ῾ἐν ἀρχῇ’·
 Ἔξοδος, Ουελλεσμωθ, ὅπερ ἐατὶν ταῦτα τὰ ὀνόματα’·
 Λευιτικόν, Ουϊκρα, καὶ ἐκάλεαεν’·
 Ἀριθμοί, Αμμεαφεκωδειμ·
 Δευτερονόμιον, Ελλεαδδεβαρειμ, οὗτοι οἱ λόγοι’·
 Ἰησοῦς υἱὸς Ναυῆ, Ιωαουεβεννουν·
 κριταί, Κριταί, παρ’ αὐτοῖς ἐν ἑνί, Σωφτειμ·
 Βασιλειῶν α΄ β΄, παρ αὐτοῖς ἕν, Σαμουηλ,῾ ὁ θεόκλητος᾿·
 γ’ δ’ ἐν ἑνί, Ουαμμελχδαυιδ, ὅπερ ἐστὶν βασιλεία Δαυίδ’·
 Παραλειπομένων ἁ β΄ ἐν ἑνί, Δαβρηϊαμειν ὅπερ ἐστὶν λόγοι ἡμερῶν'.
 Ἔζρας ἁβ΄ ἐν ἑνί, Εζρα, ὅ ἐστιν῾ βοηθός’·
 βίβλος Ψαλμῶν, Σφαρθελλειμ·
 Σολομῶνος παροιμίαι, Μελωθ· ’
 Eκκληαιαατής, Κωνλθ.
 Ἆιαμα ᾀαμάτων( οὐ γάρ, ὡς ὑπολαμβάνουαίν τινες, Ἄισματα ᾀσμάτων), Σιρασσιρειμ·
 Ἡσαΐας, Ιεσσια·
 αὺν Θρήνοις καὶ τῆ Ἐπιστολῇ ἐν ἑνί, Ιερεμια·
 Δανάη, Δανιηλ·
 Ἰεξεκιήλ, Ιεξεκιηλ·
 Ἰώβ, Ιωβ·
 by the annotationsin his own handin front of the tomes.
 XXV.
 Νow while expounding the first Ρsalm he set forth the catalogue of the sacred Scriptures of the Old Testament, writing somewhat as follows in these words:
“ But it shouldbe known that thereare twenty-two canonical books, according tothe Ηebrew tradition;
 the same as the number of the lettersof their alphabet.
" Then further on he adds as follows:
“ These are the twenty- two books accordingto the Ηebrews:
 That which is entitled withus Genesis, but withthe Hebrews, from the beginning of the books, Bresith, that is῾ In the beginning.
᾿ Exodus, that is,῾ These‘ These are‘ Αnd he called.
᾿ Νumbers, Αmmes phekodeim.
 Deuteronomy, Elle addebareim,‘ These arethe words.
᾿ Jesus theson of Nave, Iosoue benJudges, Ruth, with themin one books, Sophteim.
 2 Οf Kingdomsi, ii, with them one, Samuel,‘ The called of God.
᾿ Οf Kingdoms iii, iv, in one, david, that is,‘ The Kingdomof David.
 Chroniclesi, ii, in one, Dabreݲ iamein, that is,‘ Wordsof Esdrasi, ii, in one, Ezra, that is, ῾Helper.
᾿ Book Ρsalms, Sphar thelleim.
 Proverbs of Solomon, Meloݲth.
 Ecelesiastes, Koݲelth.
 Song of as some suppose, Songs of Songs), Sir assireim.
 Esaias, Iessia.
 Jeremiah with Lamentations and the Letter, in one, Jeremia.
 Daniel, Danieݲl.
 Ezekieݲl.
 Job, Joݲb.
 Esther, Estheݲr.
 Εσθήρ, Εσθηρ.
 ἔξω δὲ τούτων ἐστὶ τὰ Μακκαβαϊκά, ἅπερ ἐπιγέγραπται Σαρβηθααβαναιελ.
” Ταῦτα μὲν οὖν ἐν τῷ προειρημένῳ τίθησι συγγράμματι·
 ἐν δὲ τῷ πρώτῳ τῶν εἰς τὸ κατὰ Ματθαῖον, τὸν ἐκκλησιαστικὸν φυλάττων κανόνα, μόνα τέσσαρα εἰδέναι εὐαγγέλια μαρτύρεται, ὧδέ πως γράφων·
“ ὡς ἐν παραδόσει μαθὼν περὶ τῶν τεσσάρων εὐαγγελίων, ἃ καὶ μόνα ἀναντίρρητά ἐστιν ἐν τῆ ὑπὸ τὸν οὐρανὸν ἐκκλησέᾳ τοῦ θεοῦ, ὅτι πρῶτον μὲν γέγραπται τὸ κατὰ τόν ποτε τελώνην, ὕστερον δὲ ἀπόστολον Ἰνσοῦ Χριστοῦ Ματθαῖον, ἐκδεδωκότα αὐτὸ τοῖς ἀπὸ Ἰουδαϊσμοῦ ποστεύσασιν, γράμμασιν Ἑβραϊκοϊς συντεταγμένον·
 δεύτερον δὲ τὸ κατὰ Μάρκον, ὡς Πέτρος ὑφηγήσατο αὐτῷ, ποιήσαντα, ὃν καὶ υἱὸν ἐν τῇ καθολικῇ ἐπιστολῇ διὰ τούτων ὡμολόγησεν φάσκων ‘ ἀσπάζεται ὑμᾶς ἡ ἐν Βαβυλῶνι συνεκλεκτὴ καὶ Μάρκος ὁ υἱός μου’·
 καὶ τρίτον τὸ κατὰ Λουκᾶν, τὸ ὑπὸ Παύλου ἐπαινούμενον εὐαγγέλιον τοῖς ἀπὸ τῶν ἐθνῶν πεποιηκότα·
 ἐπὶ πᾶσιν τὸ κατὰ’ Ιωάννην.
” καὶ ἐν τῷ πέμπτῳ δὲ τῶν εἰς τὸ κατὰ Ἰωάννην Εξηγητικῶν ὁ αὐτὸς ταῦτα περὶ τῶν ἐπιστολῶν τῶν ἀποστόλων φησίν·
 “ ὁ δὲ ἱκανωθεὶς διάκονος γενέσθαι τῆς καινῆς διαθήκης, οὐ γράμματος, ἀλλὰ πνεύματος, Παῦλος, ὁ πεπληρωκὼς τὸ εὐαγγέλιον ἀπὸ Ἰερουσαλὴμ καὶ κύκλῳ μέχρι τοῦ Ἰλλυρικοῦ, οὐδὲ πάσαις ἔγραφεν αἶς ἐδίδαξεν ἐκκλησίαις, ἀλλὰ καὶ αἷς ἔγραφεν, ὀλίγους στίχους these there are the Maccabees, which are entitled Sar beth sabanai el.
" 1 These things he insertsin the above- mentioned treatise.
 But in the first of his Commentarieson the Gospel according to Mattheru defending the canon of the Church, he giveshis testimony that he knownsonlyfour Gospels, writing somewhatas follows:
 “.
.
.
 as having learnt by traditionconcerningfour Gospels, which alone are unquestionable in the Church ofGod under heaven, that firstwas written thataccordingto Matthew,who was oncea taxcollector but afterwards an apostle of Jesus Christ, who published it for those who from Judaism came to believe, composed as it was in the Hebrew language.
 secondly, that accordingto Mark, who wrote it in accordance with Peter's instructions, whom also Ρeter aeknowledged as his son inthe catholic epistle, speaking in these terms:
‘ She thatisin Babylon, elect together with you, saluteth you;
 and so doth Μark my son.
᾿ Αnd thirdly, that accordingto who wrote, for thosewho from the Gentiles came to believe, the Gospel that was praisedby Ρaul.
 Αfter them all, that accordingto John.
” Αnd inthefifth of his Expositions οntheGospel according to John the same person says this with reference to the epistles of the apostles:
“ But hewhowas made suffieientto become a minister of thenew covenant, not ofthe letter butof the spirit, even Ρaul, who fully preached the Gospel from Jerusalem and round about even unto Illyricum, did notso much as writeto all the Churches that he taught;
 and even to those to which he wrote he sent but a few χοῦς ἐπέστειλεν.
 Πέτρος δέ, ἐφ’ ᾧ οἰκοδομεῖται ἡ χριστοῦ ἐκκλησία, ἧς πύλαι Ἅιδου οὐ κατισχύσουσιν, μίαν ἐπιστολὴν ὁμολογουμένην καταλέλοιπεν, ἔστω δὲ καὶ δευτέραν·
 ἀμφιβάλλεται γάρ.
 τί δεῖ περὶ τοῦ ἀναπεσόντος ἐπὶ τὸ στῆθος λέγειν τοῦ Ἰησοῦ, Ἰωάννου, ὃς εὐαγγέλιον ἓν καταλέλοιπεν, ὁμολογῶν δύνασθαι τοσαῦτα ποιήειν οὐδ’ ἃ οὐδ’ ὁ κόσμος χωρῆσαι ἐδύνατο, ἔγραφεν δὲ καὶ τὴν Ἀποκάλυψιν, κελευσθεὶς σιωπῆσαι καὶ μὴ γραφαὶ τὰς τῶν ἑπτὰ βροντῶν φωνάς;
 καταλέλοιπεν καὶ ἐπιστολὴν πάνυ ὀλίγων στίχων, ἔστω δὲ καὶ δευτέραν καὶ τρίτην·
 ἐπεὶ οὐ πάντες φασὶν γνησίους εἶναι ταύτας·
 πλὴν οὔκ εἰσιν στίχων ἀμφότεραι ἑκατόν.
” Ἔτι πρὸς τούτοις περὶ τῆς Πρὸς Ἑβραίους ἐπιστολῆς ἐν ταῖς εἰς αὐτὴν Ὁμιλίας ταῦτα διαλαμβάνει·
 “ ὅτι ὁ χαρακτὴρῥ’ τῆς λέξεως τῆς Πρὸς Ἑβραίους ἐπιγεγραμμένης ἐπιστολῆς οὐκ ἔχει τὸ ἐν λόγῳ ἰδιωτικὸν τοῦ ἀποστόλου, ὁμολογήσαντος ἑαυτὸν ἰδιώτην εἶναι τῷ λόγῳ, τοῦτ’ ἐστὶν τῇ φράσει, ἀλλ’ ἐστὶν ἡ ἐπιστολὴ συνθέσει τῆς λέξεως Ἑλληνικωτέρα, πᾶς ὁ ἐπιστάμενος κρίνειν φράσεων διαφορὰς ὁμολογήσαι ἄν.
 πάλιν τε αὖ ὅτι τὰ νοήματα τῆς ἐπιστοΛῆς θαυμάσιά ἐστιν καὶ οὐ δεύτερα τῶν ἀποστολικῶν ὁμολογουμένων γραμμάτων, καὶ τοῦτο ἂν συμφήσαι εἶναι ἀληθὲς πᾶς ὁ προσέχων τῆ ἀναγνώσει τῆ ἀποστολικῇ.
 ” τούτοις μεθ’ ἕτερα ἐπιθέρει λέγων·
 “ ἐγὼ δὲ ἀποφαινόμενος εἴποιμ’ ἂν ὅτι τὰ μὲν νοήματα τοῦ ἀποστόλου ἐστίν, ἡ δὲ φράσις καὶ ἡ σύνθεσις ἀπομνημονεύσαντός τινος τὰ ἀποστολικὰ καὶ ὥσπερ σχολιογραφήσαντός τινος τὰ εἰρημένα ὑπὸ lines.
 Αnd Ρeter, on whomthe Church ofChristis built, against which the gates of Ηades shall not prevail, has leftone acknowledged epistle, and, it may be,a second also;
 for it is doubted.
 Why needI speak of him who leaned backonJesus᾿ John, who has left behind one Gospel, confessing that he could write so many that even the world itself could not contain them;
 and he wrote also the Apocalypse, being orderedto keep silence and not to write the voicesof seven thunders?.
 Ηe has left also an epistle ofavery few lines, and, it may be,a second anda third;
 for not all say that these are genuine.
 Οnly, the two of them together are nota hundred lines long.
” Furthermore, he thus discusses the Εpistleto the Ηebrews, in his Homilies upon it:
“ That the charaeter of the dietion of the epistle entitled To the Ηebrews has not the’s rudeness in speech, who confessed himself rudein speech,that is, in style, but that the epistle is better Greek in the framingofits dietion, will be admitted by everyone who is able to discern differences of style.
 But again, on the other hand, that thethoughtsof theepistleare admirable, and not inferior to the acknowledged writings of the apostle, to this also everyone will consent as true who has given attention to reading the apostle.
” Further on, he adds the following remarks:
“ But asfor myself, ifI were to statemyown opinion,I should say that the thoughts are the apostle's that the styleand composition belong to one who called to mind the apostle 's teachings and, as, it τοῦ διδασκάλου.
 εἴ τις οὖν ἐκκλησία ἔχει ταύτην τὴν ἐπιστολὴν ὡς Παύλου, αὕτη εὐδοκιμείτω καὶ ἐπὶ τούτῳ·
 οὐ γὰρ εἰκῆ οἱ ἀρχαῖοι ἄνδρες ὡς Παύλου αὐτὴν παραδεδώκασιν.
 τίς δὲ ὁ γραφὰς τὴν ἐπιστολήν, τὸ μὲν ἀληθὲς θεὸς οἶδεν, ἡ δὲ εἰς ἡμᾶς φθάσασα ἰατορίᾳ ὑπὸ τινῶν μὲν λεγόντων ὅτι Κλήμης, ὁ γενόμενος ἐπίσκοπος Ῥωμαίων, ἔγραφεν τὴν ἐπιστολήν, ὑπὸ τινῶν δὲ ὅτι Λουκᾶς, ὁ γραφὰς τὸ εὐαγγέλιον καὶ τὰς Πράξεις.
” XXVI.
 Ἀλλὰ ταῦτα μὲν ὧδε ἐχέτω·
 ἔτος δ’ ἢν τοῦτο δέκατον τῆς δηλουμένης ἡγεμονίας, καθ’ ὃ τὴν ἀπ’ Ἀλεξανδρείας μετανάστασιν ἐπὶ τὴν καισάρειαν ὁ Ὠριγένης ποιησάμενος, Ἡρακλᾷ τὸ τῆς κατηχήσεως τῶν αὐτόθι διδασκαλεῖον καταλείπει·
 οὐκ εἰς μακρὸν δὲ καὶ Δὴ Δημήτριος ὁ τῆς Ἀλεξανδρέων ἐκκλησίας ἐπίσκοπος τελευτᾷ, ἐφ’ ὅλοις ἔτεσι τρισὶ καὶ τεσσαράκοντα τῇ λειτουργίᾳ διαρκέσας·
 διαδέχεται δ’ αὐτὸν ὁ Ἡρακλᾶς.
 XXVII Διέπρεπεν δ’ ἐν τούτῳ Φιρμιλανός, Καισαρείας τῆς Καππαδοκῶν ἐπίσκοπος, τοσαύτην εἰσάγων περὶ τὸν Ὠριγένην σπουδήν, ὡς τοτὲ μὲν αὐτὸν ἀμφὶ τὰ κατ’ αὐτὸν κλίματα εἰς τὴν τῶν ἐκκλησιῶν ὠφέλειαν ἐκκαλεῖσθαι, τοτὲ δὲ ὡς αὐτὸν ἐπὶ τὴν Ἰουδαίαν στέλλεσθαι καί τινας αὐτῷ συνδιατρίβειν χρόνους τῆς εἰς τὰ θεῖα βελτιώσεως ἕνεκα.
 οὐ μὴν ἀλλὰ καὶ ὁ τῆς Ἱεροσολύμων προεσὼς Ἀλέξανδρος Θεόκτιστός τε ὁ κατὰ Καισάρειαν τὸν πάντα χρόνον προσανέχοντες αὐτῷ, οἷα διδασκάλῳ μόνῳ, τὰ τῆς τῶν θείων γραφῶν ἑρμηνείας καὶ τὰ λοιπὰ τοῦ ἐκκλησιαστικοῦ λόγου πράττειν συνεχώρουν.
 XXVIII.
 τόν γε μὴν Ῥωμαίων αὐτοκράτορα made short notes of what his master said.
 Ιf any church, therefore,holds this epistle as Ρaul’ s, let itbe commended for this also.
 For not without reason have the men of old time handed it down as Ρaul’s.
 But who wrote the epistle, in truthGod knows.
 Yet the account which has reaehed us is twofold, some saying that Clement, who was bishop οfthe Romans,wrote the epistle, others, that itwas Luke, he who wrote the Gospel and the Acts.
” XXVI.
 But this must suffice on these matters.
 Νow it was in the tenth year of the above- mentioned reign1 that Origen removedfrom Αlexandria to Caesarea, leaving toΗeraclasthe Catechetical School for those in the city.
 Αnd not long afterwards Demetrius, the bishop οf the church οf the Alexandrians, died, having continued in the ministry for forty- three entire years.
 Ηe was succeededby Heraclas.
 XXVII, Νow atthistime Firmilian, bishop of Caesarea in Cappadocia, was distinguished;
 he displayed such esteemfor Origen, that atonetime he would summonhim to hisownparts for the benefitofthe churches;
 at another,Journey himself Judaea, and spend some time with him for his own betterment in divine things.
 Νay further, Alexander,who presided over the churchof Jerusalem, and Theoctistus, who presided at Caesarea, continued their attendance on himthe whole time, as their only teacher, and usedto concede to him the task of expounding the divine Scriptures, and the οther parts of the Church’s instruction.
 XXVIII.
 But to resume.
 When Alexander the Ἀλέξανδρον τρισὶν ἐπὶ δέκα ἔτεσιν τὴν ἀρχὴν διανύσαντα Μαξιμῖνος Καῖσαρ διαδέχεται·
 ὃς δὴ κατὰ κότον τὸν πρὸς τὸν Ἀλεξάνδρου οἶκον, ἐκ πλειόνων πιστῶν αυνεστῶτα, διωγμὸν ἐγείρας, τοὺς τῶν ἐκκλησιῶν ἄρχοντας μόνους ὡς αἰτίους τῆς κατὰ τὸ εὐαγγέλιον διδασκαΛίας ἀναιρεῖσθαι προστάττει.
 τότε καὶ Ὠριγένης τὸν Περὶ μαρτυρίου συντάττει, Ἀμβροσίῳ καὶ Πρωτοκτήτῳ πρεσβυτέρῳ τῆς ἐν Καισαρεία παροικίας ἀναθεὶς τὸ σύγγραμμα, ὅτι δὴ ἄμφω περίστασις οὐχ ἡ τυχοῦσα ἐν τῷ διωγμῷ κατειλήφει·
 ἐν ἢ καὶ διαπρέψαι κατέχει λόγος ἐν ὁμολογίᾳ τοὺς ἄνδρας, οὐ πλείονος ἢ τριετοῦς χρόνου τῷ Μαξιμίνῳ διαγενομένου.
 σεσημείωται δὲ τουτονὶ τοῦ διωγμοῦ τὸν καιρὸν ἔν τε τῷ δευτέρῳ καὶ εἰκοστῷ τῶν εἰς τὸ κατὰ Ἰωάννην Ἐξηγητικῶν καὶ ἐν διαφόροις ἐπιστολαῖς Ὠριγέωης.
 XXIX.
 Γορδιανοῦ δὲ μετὰ Μαξιμῖνον τὴν Ῥωμαίων ἡγεμονίαν διαδεξαμένου, τῆς κατὰ Ῥώμην ἐκκλησίας Ποντιανὸν ἔτεσιν ἓξ ἐπισκοπεύσαντα διαδέχεται Ἀντέρως καὶ τοῦτον Φαβιανός, ἐπὶ μῆνα τῆ λειτουργίᾳ διακονησάμενον.
 ἐξ ἀγροῦ φασιν τὸν Φαβιανὸν μετὰ τὴν Ἀντέρωτος τελευτὴν ἅμ’ ἑτέροις συνελθόντα ἐπιχωριάζειν τῇ Ῥώμῃ, ἔνθα παραδοξότατα πρὸς τῆς θείας καὶ οὐρανίου χάριτος ἐπὶ τὸν κλῆρον παρεληλυθέναι.
 τῶν γὰρ ἀδελφῶν ἁπάντων χειροτονίας ἕνεκεν τῆς τοῦ μέλλοντος διαδέξασθαι τὴν ἐπισκοπὴν συγκεκροτημένων πΛείστων τε ἐπιφανῶν καὶ ἐνδόξων ἀνδρῶν τοῖς πολλοῖς ἐν ὑπονοίᾳ ὑπαρχόντων, ὁ Φαβιανὸς παρὼν οὐδενὸς μὲν ἀνθρώπων εἰς διάνοιαν ᾔει, ὅμως δ’ οὖν ἀθρόως ἐκ μετεώρου περιστερὰν καταπτᾶσαν Emperor of the Romans had brought his principate to an end after thirteen years, he was suceeededby Maximin Caesar.
 1 Ηe, through ill- will towards the house of Alexander, since it consisted for the most part of beievers, raised a persecution, ordering the leaders of the Church alone to be put to death, as being responsible for the teaching of the Gospel.
 nen aho Origen composed his work On Martyrdom, dedicating the treatise to Ambrose and Protoctetus,a presbyter of the commurity at Caesarea;
 for in the persecution no ordinary distress had befallen them both, in which distressit is recorded that these men were distinguished for the confession they madeduringthe period,not morethanthree years, that the reign of Maximin lasted.
 Origen has noted this particular time for the persecution, in the twentysecond of his Expositions of the Gospelaccordingto John,and in various letters.
 XXIX.
 Gordian having succeeded to the Roman government after Maximin, 2 Pontianus, when he had been bishop of the church of Rome forsix years, was succeeded by Anteros;
 who exercised his ministry fora month, and was succeeded by Fabian.
 It is said that Fabian, after the death οf Αnteros, came fromthe country along with others and stayedat Rome, where he came tothe office inamost miraculous manner, thanks to the divine and heavenly grace.
 For when the brethren were all assembled for the purpose of appointing him who should succeedto the episcopate, and very many notable and distinguished ersons were in the thoughtsof many, Fabian,who as there, came into nobody's mind.
 But all of udden, they relate,a dove flew down from above and πτᾶσαν ἐπικαθεσθῆναι τῇ αὐτοῦ κεφαλῇ μνημονεύουσιν, μίμημα ἐνδεικνυμένην τῆς ἐπὶ τὸν σωτῆρα τοῦ ἁγίου πνεύματος ἐν εἴδει περιστερᾶς καθόδου·
 ἐφ’ ᾧ τὸν πάντα λαόν, ὥσπερ ὑφ’ ἑνὸς πνεύματος θείου κινηθέντα, προθυμίᾳ πάσῃ καὶ μιᾷ ψυχῇ ἄξιον ἐπιβοῆσαι καὶ ἀμελλήτως ἐπὶ τὸν θρόνον τῆς ἐπισκοπῆς λαβόντας αὐτὸν ἐπιθεῖναι.
 τότε δὴ καὶ τοῦ κατ’ Ἀντιόχειαν ἐπισκόπου Ζεβέννου τὸν βίον μεταλλάξαντος, Βαβυλᾶς τὴν ἀρχὴν διαδέχεται, ἔν τε Ἀλεξανδρείᾳ μετὰ Δημήτριον Ἡρακλᾶ τὴν λειτουργίαν παρειληφότος, τῆς τῶν αὐτόθι κατηχήσεως τὴν διατριβὴν διαδέχεται Διονύσιος, εἷς καὶ οὗτος τῶν Ὠριγένους γενόμενος φοιτητῶν.
 ΧΧΧ.
 Τῷ δὲ Ὠριγένει ἐπὶ τῆς Καισαρείας τὰ συνήθη πράττοντι πολλοὶ προσῄεσαν οὐ μόνον τῶν ἐπιχωρίων, ἀλλὰ καὶ τῆς ἀλλοδαπῆς μυρίοι φοιτηταὶ τὰς πατρίδας ἀπολιπόντες·
 ὧν ἐπισήμους μάλιστα ἔγνωμενΘεόδωρο’ ν, ὃς ἢν αὐτὸς οὗτος ὁ καθ’ ἡμᾶς ἐπισκόπων διαβόητος Γρηγόριος, τόν τε τούτου ἀδελφὸν Ἀθηνόδωρον, οὓς ἀμφὶ τὰ Ἑλλήνων καὶ τὰ Ῥωμαίων μαθήματα δεινῶς ἐπτοημένους, φιλοσοφίας αὐτοῖς ἐνεὶς ἔρωτα, τῆς προτέρας σπουδῆς τὴν θείαν ἄσκησιν ἀντικαταλλάξασθαι προυτρέψατο·
 πέντε δὲ ὅλοις ἔτεσιν αὐτῷ συγγενόμενοι, τοσαύτην ἀπηνέγκαντο περὶ τὰ θεῖα βεΛτίωσιν, ὡς ἔτι νέους ἄμφω ἐπισκοπῆς τῶν κατὰ Πόντον ἐκκλησιῶν ἀξιωθῆναι.
 XXXI.
 Ἐν τούτῳ καὶ Ἀφρικανὸς ὁ τῶν ἐπιγεγραμμένων Κεστῶν συγγραφεὺς ἐγνωρίζετο.
 ἐπιστοΛὴ τούτου Ὠριγένει γραφεῖσα φέρεται, ἀποροῦντος ὡς νόθου καὶ πεπλασμένης οὔσης τῆς settled οn his head, in clear imitation of the deseent οf the Ηoly Ghost in the form of a dove upon the saviour;
 whereupon the whole people, as if moved by one divine inspiration, with all eagerness and with οne soul cried out“ worthy,” and without more ado took him and placed him on the episcopal throne.
 Αt that very time also Ζebennus, bishop of Antioch, departed thislife and Babylas succeededto the rule;
 and in Alexandria, Ηeraclas, having received the ministry after Demetrius, was succeededin the Catechetical School there by Dionysius, who had also been oneof Οrigen’s pupils.
 XXX.
 Νow while Οrigen was playing his accustomed tasks at Caesarea, many came to him, not onlyof the natives, but also numbers of foreign pupils who had left their own countries.
 Αmong these as especially distinguished we know to have been Theodore, who was the selfsame person as that renowned bishop in our day, Gregory,and his brother Αthenodore.
 Both of them were strongly enamoured of Greekand Roman Studies, but Origen instilled into them a passion for philosophy and urged them to exchange their former love for the study of divine truth.
 1 Five whole years they continued with him, and made such progress in divine things that while still young both of them were deemed worthy of the episcopate in the churehes of Pontus.
 XXXI.
 Αt that time Africanus also, the author of the books entitled Cesti, 2 was well known.
 Α letter οf his,written to Οrigen, is extant;
 he was ataloss as to whether the story of Susanna in the book of ἐν τῷ Δαωιὴλ κατὰ Εουσάνναν ἱστορίας·
 πρὸς ἢν Ὠριγένης ἀντιγράφει πληρέστατα.
 τοῦ δ’ αὐτοῦ Ἀφρικανοῦ καὶ ἄλλα τὸν ἀριθμὸν πέντε Χρονογραφιῶν ἦλθεν εἰς ἡμᾶς ἐπ’ ἀκριβὲς πεπονημένα σπουδάσματα·
 ἐν οἷς φησιν ἑαυτὸν πορείαν στείλασθαι ἐπὶ τὴν Ἀλεξάνδρειαν διὰ πολλὴν τοῦ Ἡρακλᾶ φήμην, ὃν ἐπὶ λόγοις φιλοσόφοις καὶ τοῖς ἄλλοις Ἑλλήνων μαθήμασιν εὖ μάλα διαπρέφατα, τὴν ἐπισκοπὴν τῆς αὐτόθι ἐκκγησίας ἐγχειρισθῆναι ἐδηλώσαμεν.
 καὶ ἑτέρα δὲ τοῦ αὐτοῦ Ἀφρικανοῦ φέρεται ἐπιστολὴ πρὸς Ἀριστείδην, περὶ τῆς νομιζομένης διαφωνίας τῶν παρὰ Ματθαίῳ τε καὶ Λουκᾷ τοῦ χριστοῦ γενεαλογιῶν·
 ἐν ἧ σαφέστατα τὴν συμφωνίαν τῶν εὐαγγελιστῶν παρίστησιν ἐξ ἱστορίας εἰς αὐτὸν κατελθούσης, ἢν κατὰ καιρὸν ἐν τῷ πρώτῳ τῆς μετὰ χεῖρας ὑποθέσεως προλαβὼν ἐξεθέμην.
 ΧΧΧΙΙ.
 καὶ Ὠριγένει δὲ κατὰ τοῦτον τὸν χρόνον τὰ εἰς τὸν Ἡσαταν, ἐν ταὐτῷ δὲ καὶ τὰ εἰς τὸν Ἰεξεκιὴλ συνετάττετο·
 ὧν εἰς μὲν τὸ τρίτον μέρος τοῦ Ἡσαΐου μέχρι τῆς ὁράσεως τῶν τετραπόδων τῶν ἐν τῆ ἐρήμῳ τριάκοντα εἰς ἡμᾶς περιῆλθον τόμοι, εἰς δὲ τὸν Ἰεζεκιὴλ πέντε καἰ εἴκοσι, οὓς καὶ μόνους εἰς τὸν πάντα πεποίηται προφήτην.
 γενόμενος δὲ τηνικάδε ἐν Ἀθήναις, περαίνει μὲν τὰ εἰς τὸν Ἰεζεκιήλ, τῶν δ’ εἰς τὸ Αισμα τῶν ᾀσμάτων ἄρχεται, καὶ πρόεισίν γε αὐτόθι μέχρι τοῦ πέμπτου συγγράμματος·
 ἐπανελθὼν δ’ ἐπὶ τὴν Καισάρειαν καὶ ταῦτα εἰς πέρας, δέ κα ὄντα τὸν ἀριθμόν, ἄγει.
 τί δεῖ τῶν λόγων τἀνδρὸς ἐπὶ τοῦ παρόντος τὸν ἀκριβῆ κατάλογον ποιεῖσθαι, ἰδίας δεόμενον σχολῆς;
 ὃν καὶ ἀνεγράψαμεν Daniel werea spurious forgery.
 Origen makes a very full reply to it.
 Αnd of the same Africanus there have reached us as well five books οf Chronographies, a monument of labour and accuracy.
 In these he says that he himself madea journey to Alexandria because οf the great fame of Ηeraclas;
 who, as we have stated, 1 was greatly distinguished for philosophy and other Greek learning, and was entrusted with the bishopric of the church there.
 Αnd another letter of the same Αfricanus is extant, to Αristides, On the supposed discord between the Genealogies of Christ in Matthew and Luke.
 In it he establishes very clearly the harmony οf the evangelists from an account that came down to him, which by anticipationI set forth in the proper place in the first book of the present work.
 2 XXXII.
 Αnd Origen too at this time was composing his Commentaries οn Isaiah, and at the sametime those also οn Ezekiel.
 Of the former, thirty tomes have come our way on the third part of Ιsaiah, up tothe vision of the beastsinthe desert;
 and on Ezekiel five and twenty, the only ones that he has written οnthe whole prophet.
 Αnd having come at that time to Αthens, he finished thecommentary on Ezekiel, and began that on thesongof Songs, carrying it forward there up to the fifth book.
 And returning to Caesarea he brought these also to an end, numbering ten.
 Why should one draw up the exact catalogue of the man 's works here and seeing that sueh would requirea special study? Αnd εγράψαμεν ἐπὶ τῆς τοῦ Παμφίλου βίου τοῦ καθ’ ἡμᾶς ἱεροῦ μάρτυρος ἀναγραφῆς, ἐν ᾖ τὴν περὶ τὰ θεῖα σπουδὴν τοῦ Παμφίλου ὁπόση τις γεγόνοι, παριστῶντες, τῆς συναχθείσης αὐτῷ τῶν τε Ὠριγένους καὶ τῶν ἄλλων ἐκκλησιαστικῶν συγγραφέων βιβλιοθήκης τοὺς πίνακας παρεθέμην, ἐξ ὧν ὅτῳ φίλον, πάρεστιν ἐντελέστατα τῶν Ὠριγένους πόνων τὰ εἰς ἡμᾶς ἐλθόντα διαγνῶναι.
 νυνὶ δὲ πορευτέον ἐπὶ τὴν τῆς ἱστορίας ἀκολουθίαν.
 ΧΧΧΙΙΙ.
 βήρυλλος ὁ μικρῷ πρόσθεν δεδηλωμέωος Βόστρων τῆς Ἀραβίας ἐπίσκοπος, τὸν ἐκκλησιαστικὸν παρεκτρέπων κανόνα, ξένα τινὰ τῆς πίστεως παρεισφέρειν ἐπειρᾶτο, τὸν σωτῆρα καὶ κύριον ἡμῶν λέγειν τολμῶν μὴ προϋφεστάναι κατ’ ἰδίαν οὐσίας περιγραφὴν πρὸ τῆς εἰς ἀνθρώπους ἐπιδημίας μηδὲ μὴν θεότητα ἰδίαν ἔχειν, ἀλλ ἐμπολιτευομένην αὐτῷ μόνην τὴν πατρικήν.
 ἐπὶ τούτῳ πλείστων ἐπισκόπων ζητήσεις καὶ διαλόγους πρὸς τὸν ἄνδρα πεποιημένων, μεθ’ ἑτέρων παρακληθεὶς Ὠριγένης κάτεισι μὲν εἰς ὁμιλίαν τὰ πρῶτα τῷ ἀνδρί, τίνα νοῦν ἔχοι, ἀποπειρώμενος, ὡς δ’ ἔγνωδ’ τι καὶ λέγοι, εὐθύνας μὴ ὀρθοδοξοῦντα λογισμῷ τε πείσας, τῇ περὶ τοῦ δόγματος ἐφίστη ἀληθείᾳ ἐπί τε τὴν προτέραν ὑγιῆ δόξαν ἀποκαθίστησιν.
 καὶ φέρεταί γε εἰς ἔτι νῦν ἔγγραφα τοῦ τε βηρύλλου καὶ τῆς δι’ αὐτὸν γενομένης συνόδου, ὁμοῦ τὰς Ὠριγένους πρὸς αὐτὸν ζητήσεις καὶ τὰς λεχθείσας ἐπὶ τῆς αὐτοῦ παροικίας διαλέξεις ἕκαστά τε τῶν τότε πεπραγμένων περιέχοντα.
 καὶ ἄλλα μὲν οὖν μυρία Ὠριγένους πέρι μνήμῃ παραδιδόασιν τῶν κα ἡμᾶς οἱ πρεσβύτεροι, ἃ καὶ παρήσειν μοι δοκῶ, we did record it in our account of the lifeof Pamphilus, that holy martyrofour day,in which,in showing the extent οf Pamphilus’s zealfor divine things, quoted as evidencethe lists in the library that had brought together of the works of Origen and of other ecclesiastical writers;
 writers;
 and from who pleases can gather the fullest knowledge of the works of Origen that have reached us.
 But We must now proceed with οur history.
 XXXIII.
 Beryllus, who, as we have mentioneda little above, 1 was bishop of Bostra in Αrabia, perverting the Church’s standard, attempted to introduce things foreign to the faith, daring to say that our Saviour and Lord did not pre- exist inan individual existence of Ηis own before Ηis coming to reside among men, nor had Ηea divinity ofΗis own, only the Father’s dwelling in Ηim.
 after a large number of bishops had held questionings and discussions with the man, Origen being invited along with others, entered in the first place into conversation with the man to discover what Were his opinions, and when he knew what it was that he asserted, he corrected what was unorthodox, and, persuading him by reasoning, established him in the truth as to the doctrine, and restored him to his former sound opinion.
 Αnd there are still extant to this very day records in writing both of Beryllus and of the synod that was heldon his account, which contain at once the questions Οrigen put put him and the discussions that took place in his own community, and all that was done on that occasion.
 And a great many other things about Origen have been handed down to memory by the older menof our day, which οὐ τῆς ἐνεστώσης ἐχόμενα πραγματείας·
 δάα δὲ ἀναγκαῖα τῶν περὶ αὐτὸν διαγνῶναι ἢν, ταῦτα καὶ ἐκ τῆς ὑπὲρ αὐτοῦ πεπονημένης ἡμῖν τε καὶ τῷ καθ’ ἡμᾶς ἱερῷ ἱερῷ μάρτυρι Παμφίλῳ ἀπολογίας πάρεστιν ἀναλέξασθαι, ἢν τῶν φιλαιτίων ἕνεκα συμπονήσαντες ἀλλήλοις διὰ σπουδῆς πεποιήμεθα.
 XXXIV.
 Ἔτεσιν δὲ ὅλοις ἓξ Γορδιανοῦ τὴν Ρωμαίων διανύσαντος ἡγεμονίαν, Φίλιππος ἄμα παιδὶ Φιλίππῳ τὴν ἀρχὴν διαδέχεται.
 τοῦτον κατέχει λόγος χριστιανὸν ὄντα ἐν ἡμέρᾳ τῆς ὑστάτης τοῦ πάσχα παννυχίδος τῶν ἐπὶ τῆς ἐκκλησίας εὐχῶν τῷ πλήθει μετασχεῖν ἐθελῆσαι, οὐ πρότερον δὲ ὑπὸ τοῦ τηνικάδε προεστῶτος ἐπιτραπῆναι εἰαβαλεῖν, ἢ ἐξομολογήσασθαι καὶ ἐν παραπτώμααιν ἐξεταζομένοις μετανοίας τε χώραν ἴσχουσιν ἑαυτὸν καταλέξαι·
 ἄλλως γὰρ μὴ ἄν ποτε πρὸς αὐτοῦ, μὴ οὐχὶ τοῦτο ποιήσαντα, διὰ πολλὰς τῶν κατ’ αὐτὸν αἰτίας παραδεχθῆναι.
 καὶ πειθαρχῆσαί γε προθύμως λέγεται, τὸ γνήσιον καὶ εὐλαβὲς τῆς περὶ τὸν θεῖον φόβον διαθέσεως ἔργοις ἐπιδεδειγμένον.
 XXXV.
 τρίτον δὲ τούτῳ ἔτος ἦν, καθ’ ὃ μεταλλάξαντος Ἡρακλᾶ τὸν βίον ἐπὶ δέκα ἓξ ἔτεσιν τῆς προστασίας τῶν κατ’ Ἀλεξάνδρειαν ἐκκΛησιῶν, τὴν ἐπισκοπὴν Διονύσιος ὑπολαμβάνει.
 XXXVI.
 τότε δῆτα, οἷα καὶ εἰκὸς ἦν, πληθυούσης τῆς πίστεως πεπαρρησιασμένου τε τοῦ καθ’ ἡμᾶς παρὰ πᾶσιν λόγου, ὑπὲρ τὰ ἑξήκοντά φασιν ἔτη τὸν Ὠριγένην γενόμενον, ἅτε δὴ μεγίστην ἤδη συλλεξάμενον ἐκ τῆς μακρᾶς παρασκευῆς ἕξιν, τὰς ἐπὶ τοῦ κοινοῦ λεγομένας αὐτῷ διαλέξειςI think it wellto pass over, as they do not concern the Ρresent work.
 But all that it was necessary to know of his affairs, these also one may gather from the Apology that was written on his behalf by us and Ρamphilus, that holy martyr Of our day, a work that we were at pains to compose conjointly because of the fault- finders.
 XXXXIV.
 When after six whole years Gordian broadught his government of the Romanstoan end, Ρhilip along with his sOn Ρhilip suceeeded to the principate.
 1 It is recorded that he, beinga Christian, wished on the day of the last paschal vigil to share along with the multitude the Ρrayers atthe church,but was not permittedto enter by him whowasthen preriding until he eonfessed and numbered himself among those who were reckoned to be in sins and were occupying the place of penitence;
 for that otherwise, had henot done so, he would never have been received by the presidenton account of themany charges made concerning him.
 Αnd it is said that he obeyed readily, displaying by his actions how genuine and pious was his disposition towards the fear of God.
 XXXV.
 It was the third year of his regin2when Ηeraclasdepartedthis life, after Ρresidingfor sixteen years over the churches at Αlexandria;
 Dionysius took up the episcopal office.
 XXXVI.
 Then indeed, as was fitting, When the faith was inereasing and our doctrine was boldly proclaimed in the ears of all, it issaid that Οrigen, who was over sixtyyears Οf age,inasmuch as he had nowacquired immeense facilityfrom long preparation, 3 Ρermitted shorthand- writers to take down the dis- ταχυγράφοις μεταλαβεῖν ἐπιτρέψαι, οὐ πρότερόν ποτε τοῦτο γενέσθαι συγκεχωρηκότα.
 Ἐν τούτῳ καὶ τὰ πρὸς τὸν ἐπιγεγραμμένον καθ’ ἡμῶν Κέλσου τοῦ Ἐπικουρείου Ἀληθῆ λόγον ὀκτὼ τὸν ἀριθμὸν Ἐπικουρείου συντάττει τοὺς εἰς τὸ κατὰ Ματθαῖον εὐαγγέλιον εἴκοσι πέντε τόμους τούς τε εἰς τοὺς δώδεκα προφήτας, ἀφ’ ὧν μόνους εὕρομεν πέντε καὶ εἴκοσι.
 φέρεται δὲ αὐτοῦ καὶ πρὸς αὐτὸν βασιλέα Φίλιππον ἐπιστολὴ καὶ ἄλλη πρὸς τὴν τούτου γαμετὴν Σευήραν διάφοροί τε ἄλλαι πρὸς διαφόρους·
 ὧν ὁπόσας σποράδην παρὰ διαφόροις σωθείσας συναγαγεῖν δεδυνήμεθα, ἐν ἰδίαις τόμων περιγραφαῖς, ὡς ἄν μηκέτι διαρρίπτοιντο, κατελέξαμεν, τὸν ἑκατὸν ἀριθμὸν ὑπερβαινούσας.
 γράφει δὲ καὶ Φαβιανῷ τῷ κατὰ‘ Ρώμην ἐπισκόπῳ ἑτέροις τε πλείστοις ἄρχουαιν ἐκκλησιῶν περὶ τῆς κατ’ αὐτὸν ὀρθοδοξίας·
 ἔχεις καὶ τούτων τὰς ἀποδείξεις ἐν ἕκτῳ τῆς γραφείσης ἡμῖν περὶ τοῦ ἀνδρὸς ἀπολογίας.
 XXXVII.
 Ἄλλοι δ’ αὖ πάλιν ἐπὶ τῆς Ἀραβίας κατὰ τὸν δηλούμενον ἐπιφύονται χρόνον δόγματος ἀλλοτρίου τῆς ἀληθείας εἰσηγηταί, οἳ ἔλεγον ἀνθρωπείαν ψυχὴν τέως μὲν κατὰ τὸν ἐνεστῶτα καιρὸν ἅμα τῆ τελευτῇ συναποθνῄσκειν σώμασιν καὶ συνδιαφθείρεσθαι, αὗθις δέ τὸν τῆς ἀναστάσεως καιρὸν σὺν αὐτοῖς καὶ δὴ καὶ τότε συγκροτηθείσης οὐ σμικρᾶς συνόδου, πάλιν Ὠριγένης παρακληθεὶς καὶ ἐνταῦθα κινήσας τε λόγους ἐπὶ τοῦ κοινοῦ περὶ τοῦ ζητουμένου, οὕτως ἠνέχθη ὡς μετατεθῆναι τὰς τῶν πρότερον ἐσφαλμένων διανοίας.
 ΧΧΧVIII.
 τότε δὲ καὶ ἄλλης διαστροφῆς κατάρχεται delivered byhim in public,a thing that he hadnever before allowed.
 Αt that time also he composed the treatises, eight in number, in answer to the work against us, entitled True Discourse of Celsus the Epicurean.
 and twenty- five tomes on the Gospel according to Μatthew, and thoseon the twelve prophets, of which we found only five and twenty.
 Αnd there is extant alSoa letter of his to theEmperor Philip himself, and another tohis wife Severa, and narious other letters to various persons.
 Αs many of these as we havebeen able to bring together, preserved as they were hereand there by various persons, we arrangedin separate roll- eases, so that they might no longer be dispersed.
 These letters number more than a hundred.
 Αnd he wrote also to Fabian the bishopof Rome, and to very many other rulers of churches, with reference to his orthodoxy.
 You will find these facts also established in the sixth book of the Apology We wrote on the’s hehalf.
 XXXVII.
 Οnce more in Αrabia at the above- men- tioned time other persons sprang up, introducing a doctrine foreign to the truth, and saying that the human soul dies fora while in this present time, along withour bodies,at their death, and with them turns to corruption;
 but that hereafter, at the timeof the resurrection, it will come to life again along with them.
 Moreover, when a synod of no smalldimensions was then assembled together, Origen was again invited, and there openeda discussion in public on the subjectin question, with sueh power that he changed the opinions of those whohad formerly been deluded.
 XXXVIII.
 Αt that time also another perverse ἄρχεται ἡ τῶν Ἑλκεσαϊτῶν λεγομένη αἵρεσις, καὶ ἅμα τῷ ἄρξασθαι ἀπἐσβη.
 μνημονεύει δ’ αὐτῆς ὁμιλῶν ἐπὶ τοῦ κοινοῦ εἰς τὸν πݲβݲ ψαλμὸν ὁ ὧδέ πως λέγων·
“ ἐλήλυθέν τις ἐπὶ τοῦ παρόντος μέγα φρονῶν ἐπὶ τῷ δύνασθαι πρεσβεύειν γνώμης ἀθέου καὶ ἀσεβεστάτης, καλουμένης‘ Ελκεσαϊτῶν, νεωστὶ ἐπανισταμένης ταῖς ἐκκλησίαις.
 ἐκείνη ἡ γνώμη οἷα λέγει κακά, παραθήσομαι ὑμῖν, ἵνα μὴ αυναρπάζησθε.
 ἀθετεῖ τινα ἀπὸ πάσης γραφῆς, κέχρηται ῥητοῖς πάλιν ἀπὸ πάσης παλαιᾶς τε καὶ εὐαγγελικῆς, τὸν ἀπόστολον τέλεον ἀθετεῖ.
 φησὶν δὲ ὅτι τὸ ἀρνήσασθαι ἀδιάφορόν ἐστιν ὁ μὲν νοήσας τῷ μὲν στόματι ἐν ἀνάγκαις ἀρνήσεται, τῇ δὲ καρδίᾳ οὐχί.
 καὶ βίβλον τινὰ φέρουσιν, ἢν λέγουσιν ἐξ οὐρανοῦ πεπτωκέναι καὶ τὸν ἀκηκοότα ἐκείνης καὶ πιστεύοντα ἄφεσιν λήψεσθαι τῶν ἁμαρτημάτων, ἄλλην ἄφεσιν παρ’ ἢν χριστὸς Ἰησοῦς ἀφῆκεν.
” XXXIX.
 Ἀλλὰ γὰρ Φίλιππον ἔτεσιν ἑπτὰ βασιΛεύσαντα διαδέχεται Δέκιος·
 ὃς δὴ τοῦ πρὸς Φίλιππον ἔχθους ἕνεκα διωγμὸν κατὰ τῶν ἐκκλησιῶν ἐγείρει, ἐν ᾧ Φαβιανοῦ ἐπὶ‘ Ρώμης μαρτυρίῳ τελειωθέντος, Κορνήλιος τὴν ἐπισκοπὴν διαδέχεται.
 Ἐπὶ δὲ Παλαιστίνης Ἀλέξανδρος ὁ τῆς ῾Ιεροσολύμων ἐκκληαίας ἐπίσκοπος αὖθις διὰ Χριστὸν ἐν τῇ Καισαρείᾳ ἡγεμονικοῖς παραστὰς δικαστηρίοις καὶ ἐπὶ δευτέρᾳ διαπρέψας ὁμολογίᾳ, δικαστηρίοις πειρᾶται, λιπαρῷ γήρει καὶ σεμνῇ πολιᾷ κατεστεμμένος.
 τούτου δὲ μετὰ τὴν ἐν τοῖς ἡγεμονικοῖς opinion had its beginning, the heresy knownas that οfthe Helkesaites, whic no sooner began than it was quenched.
 Origen mentions it ina public address οn the eighty- second Psalm, some such words as these:
“ There has come justnowa certain man who prides himself on being able to champion a godless and very impious οpinion, of the Helkesaites, as it is ealled, which has lately come into opposition with the churches.
I shall lay before you the mischievousteachings ofthat opinion, that youmay not be carriedawayby it.
 It rejects some things from every scripture;
 agam;
 it has made use texts from every part ofthe old Testament and the Gospels;
 rejects the Αpostle entirely.
 Αnd it says that to denyisa matterofof indifference,and that the ffisereetmanwillon occasions of necessity denywith his mouth, but not in his heart.
 Αnd they produeea certain book οf which they say that it hasfallenfrom heaven, and thathewho has hearditand beldieves will reeeive forgiveness οf his sins—a forgiveness other than that which Christ Jesus has bestowed.
” XXXIX.
 But to resume.
 When Philip had reigned for seven years he was succeededby Decius.
 1 Ηe, on account of his enmity towards Philip, raised a persecutionagainstthe churches,in which Fabian was pertected by martyrdom at Rome, and was sueceeded in the episeopateby Cornelius.
 In Palestine, Αlexander,the bishop of the church of Jerusalem, appeared οnce more for Chrisrt’s sake caesarea beforethe governor’s courts,and for second time distinguished himself by the confession he made;
 he underwent the trial of imprisonment, crowned with the venerable hoary loeks of ripe old age.
 Αnd when after the splenffidand manifest δικαστηρίοις λαμπρὰν καὶ περιφανῆ μαρτυρίαν ἐπὶ τῆς εἱρκτῆς κοιμηθέντος, Μαζαβάνης τῆς ἐν ῾Ιεροσολύμοις ἐπισκοπῆς ναδείκνυται.
 Τῷ δ’ Ἀλεξάνδρῳ παραπλησίως ἐν Ἀντιοχείᾳ τοῦ Βαβυλᾶ μετὰ ὁμολογίαν ἐν δεσμωτηρίῳ μεταλλάξαντος, Φάβιος τῆς αὐτόθι προΐσταται ἐκκλησίας.
 Τὰ μὲν οὗν’ Ωριγένει κατὰ τὸν διωγμὸν συμβάντα οἷα καὶ ὅσα, καὶ ὁποίας ἔτυχεν τελευτῆς, τοῦ πονηροῦ δαίμονος ἐφαμίλλως τἀνδρὶ πανστρατιᾷ παραταξαμένου πάσῃ τε μηχανῆ καὶ δυνάμει κατ’ αὐτοῦ στρατηγήσαντος παρὰ πάντας τε τοὺς τηνικάδε πολεμηθέντας διαφερόντως ἐπισκήψαντος αὐτῷ, οἷά τε καὶ ὅσα διὰ τὸν χριστοῦ λόγον ὁ ἀνὴρ ὑπέμεινεν, δεσμὰ καὶ βασάνους τὰς τοῦ σώματος τάς τε ὑπὸ σιδήρῳ καὶ μυχοῖς εἱρκτῆς τιμωρίας, καὶ ὡς ἐπὶ πλείσταις μέραις τοὺς πόδας ὑπὸ τέσσαρα τοῦ κολαστηρίου ξύλου παραταθεὶς διαστήματα, πυρός τε ἀπειλὰς καὶ ὅσα ἄλλα πρὸς τῶν ἐχθρῶν ἐπενεχθέντα καρτερῶς ἤνεγκεν, οἵου τε τὰ κατ’ αὐτὸν ἔτυχεν τέλους, μηδαμῶς αὐτὸν ἀνελεῖν παντὶ σθέωει τοῦ δικαστοῦ φιλονείκως ἐνστάντος, ὁποίας τε μετὰ ταῦτα καταλείπει φωνὰς καὶ αὐτὰς πλήρεις τοῖς ἀναλήψεως δεομένοις ὠφελείας, πλεῖσται ὅσαι τἀνδρὸς ἐπιστολαὶ τἀληθὲς ὁμοῦ καὶ ἀκριβὲς περιέχουσιν.
 XL.
 Τά γέ τοι κατὰ Διονύσιον ἐκ τῆς πρὸς Γερμανὸν ἐπιστολῆς αὐτοῦ παραθήσομαι, ἔνθα τοῦτον περὶ ἑαυτοῦ λέγων ἱστορεῖ τὸν τρόπον·
 “ ἐγὼ δὲ καὶ ἐνώπιον τοῦ θεοῦ λαλῶ, καὶ αὐτὸς οἶδεν εἰ ψεύδομαι·
 οὐδεμίαν ἐπ’ ἐμαυτοῦ βαλλόμενος οὐδὲ ἀθεεὶ πεποίημαι τὴν φυγήν, ἀλλὰ καὶ testimony thathe gave in the governor’s courts asleepin prison,Mazabanes was proclaimedasis successor in the episeopate at Jerusalem.
 Αnd when at Αntioch Babvlas, in like manner to lexander, after confession departed this life in rison, Fabius was made president of the church ere.
 Now the nature and extent of that which happened to Origen at the time ofthe persecution, and what was theend thereof;
 how the evil demon marshalled ll his forces in rivalry agrialnst the man, how he led them with every derivlceand power, and singled him ut, above all others upon whom he made war at that ime, for special attack;
 the nature and extent of which he endured for the word of Christ, chainsd tortures,punishments infficted onhis body, unishments as he lay in iron and in the recesses of is dungion;
 and how, when for many days his feet ere stretched four spaces in that instrument of rture, the stoeks, he bore with a stout heart threats f fire and everything else that was inflicted by his nemies;
 and the kind of issue he had thereof, the udge eagerly striving with all his might on no account put him to death;
 and what sort of sayings he eft behind him after this, sayings full ofhelp for those ho needed uplifting— of all thesematters the man’s umerous letters contain botha true and aecurate count.
 XL.
 Αs to that which befell Dionysius,I shall uote froma letter ofhis against Germanus, where, eaking of himself, he givesthe following account:
 NowI for my part speakalso before God, and Ηe οws ifI lie.
 Αcting not on my οwn judgementnorart from God haveI taken flight;
 but οna former πρότερον, τοῦ κατὰ Δέκιον προτεθέντος διωγμοῦ, Σαβῖνος αὐτῆς ὥρας φρουμεντάριον ἔπεμψεν εἰς ἀωαζήτησίν μου, κἀγὼ μὲν τεσσάρων ἡμερῶν ἐπὶ τῆς οἰκίας ἔμεινα, τὴν ἄφιξιν τοῦ φρουμενταρίου προσδοκῶν, ὃ δὲ πάντα μὲν περιῆλθεν ἀνερευνῶν, τὰς ὁδοὺς τοὺς ποταμοὺς τοὺς ἀγρούς, ἔνθα κρύπτεσθαί με ἢ βαδίζειν ὑπενόησεν, ἀορασάᾳ δὲ εἴχετο μὴ εὑ τὴν τὴν οἰκίαν·
 οὐ γὰρ ἐπίστευεν οἴκοι με διωκόμενον μένειν.
 καὶ μόλις, μετὰ τὴν τετάρτην ἡμέραν, κελεύσαντός μοι μεταστῆναι τοῦ θεοῦ καὶ παραδόξως ὁδοποιήσαντος, ἐγώ τε καὶ οἱ παῖδες καὶ πολλοὶ τῶν ἀδελφῶν ἅμα συνεξήλθομεν.
 καὶ ὅτι τῆς τοῦ θεοῦ προνοίας ἔργον ἐκεῖνο γέγονεν, τὰ ἑξῆς ἐδήλωσεν, ἐν οἷς τάχα τισὶν γεγόναμεν χρήσιμοι.
” Εἶτά τινα μεταξὺ εἰπών, τὰ μετὰ τὴν φυγὴν αὐτῷ συμβεβηκότα δηλοῖ, ταῦτα ἐπιφέρων·
“ ἐγὼ μὲν γὰρ περὶ ἡλίου δυσμὰς ἅμα τοῖς αὺν ἐμοὶ γενόμενος ὑπὸ τοῖς στρατιώταις, εἰς Ταπόσιριν ἤχθην, ὁ δὲ Τιμόθεος κατὰ τὴν τοῦ θεοῦ πρόνοιαν ἔτυχεν μὴ παρὼν μηδὲ καταληφθείς, ἐλθὼν δὲ ὕστερον εὗρεν τὸν οἶκον ἔρημον καὶ φρουροῦντας αὐτὸν ὑπηρέτας, ἡμᾶς δέ ἐξηνδραποδισμένους.
” Kαὶ μεθ’ ἕτερά φησιν·
“ καὶ τίς ὁ τῆς θαυμασίας οἰκονομίας αὐτοῦ τρόπος;
 τὰ γὰρ ἀληθῆ λεχθήσεται.
 ἀπήντετό τις τῶν χωριτῶν ὑποφεύγοντι τῷ Τιμοθέῳ καὶ τεταραγμένῳ, καὶ τὴν αἰτίαν τῆς ἐπείξεως ἐπύθετο.
 ὁ δὲ τἀληθὲς ἐξεῖπεν, κἀκεῖνος occasion also when the persecution under Decius was blicly proclaimed, that selfsame hour Sabinus sent frumentarius1 to seek me out, and οn my partI emained four days atmy house, expeeting the ival of the frumentarius;
 but he went around earching everything, the roads, the rivers, the fields, here he suspected I was hidden or walking, but was olden with blindness and did not find the house.
 or he didnot believe that, pursuedasI was,Ι was aying at home.
 Αnd after the fourth day, when odbade me depart, and miraculously made a way, ith difficulty didI and the boys2and many oftherethren set out together.
 Αnd that this Was the οrk ofthe Dirine Providence,the sequel showed, which we proved helpful, it may be, to some.
” Then, after some intervening remarks, he tells what appened to him after the ffight, adffingas follows:
‘ ForI, indeed, falling about sunset into the handsof the soldiers, together with those who were with was broughtto Taposiris,3 but Timothyby the ivine Providence happened to be absent and to cape being seized;
 but coming afterwards he found house deserted and senants guarffing it, and us mpletely taken” Αnd further on he says:
“ Αnd whatwasthe way whichΗewonderfully brought it about? For the shall be told.
 one of the country- folk met imonthyfleeingand distraught,and inquired the ason of his haste.
 Αnd he spoke οut the truth, and whenthe other heard it( now hewasoff to take part ἀκούσας( ἀπῄει δ’ εὐωχησόμενος γάμους, διαπαννυχίζειν γὰρ αὐτοῖς ἐν ταῖς τοιαύταις συνόδοις ἔθος) εἰσελθὼν ἀπήγγειλεν τοῖς κατακειμένοις·
 οἵ δὲ ὁρμῇ μιᾷ, καθάπερ ὑπὸ συνθήματι, ἐξανέστησαν, καὶ δρόμῳ φερόμενοι τάχιστα ἧκον, ἐπεισπεσόντες τε ἡμῖν ἠλάλαξαν, καὶ φυγῆς εὐθέως τῶν φρουρούντων ἡμᾶς στρατιωτῶν γενομένης, ἐπέστησαν ἡμῖν, ὡς εἴχομεν ἐπὶ τῶν ἀστρώτων σκιμπόδων κατακείμενοι.
 κἀγὼ μέν, οἶδεν ὁ θεὸς ὡς λῃστὰς εἶναι πρότερον ἡγούμενος ἐπὶ σύλησιν καὶ ἁρπαγὴν ἀφικομένους, μένων ἐπὶ τῆς εὐνῆς, ἤμην γυμνὸς ἐν τῷ λινῷ ἐσθήματι, τὴν δὲ λοιπὴν ἐσθῆτα παρακειμένην αὐτοῖς ὤρεγον·
 οἳ δὲ ἐξανίστασθαί τε ἐκέλευον καὶ τὴν ταχίστην ἐξιέναι.
 καὶ τότε συνεὶς ἐφ’ ᾧ παρῆσαν, ἀνέκραγον δεόμενος αὐτῶν καὶ ἱκετεύων ἀπιέναι καὶ ἡμᾶς ἐᾶν, εἰ δὲ βούλονταί τι χρηστὸν ἐργάσασθαι, τοὺς ἀπάγοντάς με Φθάσαι καὶ τὴν κεφαλὴν αὐτοὺς τὴν ἐμὴν ἀποτεμεῖν ἠξίουν.
 καὶ τοιαῦτα βοῶντος, ὡς ἴσασιν οἱ κοινωνοί μου καὶ μέτοχοι πάντων γενόμενοι, ἀνίστασαν πρὸς βίαν.
 κἀγὼ μὲν παρῆ ἐμαυτὸν ὕπτιον εἰς τοὔδαφος, οἳ δὲ διαλαβόντες χειρῶν καὶ ποδῶν σύροντες ἐξήγαγον, ἐπηκολούθουι δέ μοι οἱ τούτων πάντων μάρτυρες, Γάιος Φαῦστος Πέτρος Παῦλος·
 οἳ καὶ ὑπολαβόντες με Φοράδηι ἐξήγαγον τοῦ πολιχνίου καὶ ὄνῳ γυμνῷ ἐπιβιβάσαν·
 τες ἀπήγαγον.
 ” ταῦτα περὶ ἑαυτοῦ ὁ Διονύσιος.
 XLI.
 Ὁ δ’ αὐτὸς ἐν ἐπιστολῇ τῇ πρὸς Φάβιον Ἀντιοχέων ἐπίσκοπον, τῶν κατὰ Δέκιον μάρη ρησάντων ἐν Ἀλεξανδρείᾳ τοὺς ἀγῶνας τοῦτο, ἱστορεῖ τὸν τρόπον·
“ οὐκ ἀπὸ τοῦ βασιλικοί προστάγματος ὁ διωγμὸς παρ’ ἡμῖν ἤρξατο, ἀλλ’ ina marriage- feast, for it is their custom to spend the tire night in such gatherings) he wentinand toldewho were reclining at table.
 Αnd they all, with single impulse, as if ata preconcerted signal, rose,and came running wtih all speed;
 and bursting upon us theygavea shout, and when the soldiers at were guarding us straightway took to ffight, theye up to us, lying nswe were on pallets without dding.
 ΑndI—God knows that at RrstIey were robbers comingto plunder and steal— yed on thebed, naked save formy linen shirt, ande rest οfmy gannents that were lying by I held t to them.
 But they bade me get upandgo out thallspeed.
 Αnd then, gathering why they were e,I cried out, begging and beseeching them to goy and leave us alone;
 andI asked them, if they hed to do mea good turn, to anticipate those who leading me away and to cut off my head themves.
 Αnd while I was thus shouting, as those who e my compaions and partakersin everything, they raised me up forcibly.
 ΑndI let myself οnmy backonthe ground,but they seized me by hands and feet and dragged and brought me ide.
 Αnd there followed me the witnesses of alle things, Gaius, Faustus, Peter and Ρaul;
 who took me up in theirarmsand brought me oute little town, and setting me on the bare back of led me away.
” Such is the account concerning himself.
 XLI.
 But the same person ina letter to Fabius, of the Antiochenes, gives the following account contests of those who suffered martyrdom at dria under Decius:
“ It wasnotwith the ial edict thatthe persecution began amongst γὰρ ὅλον ἐνιαυτὸν προύλαβεν, καὶ φθάσας ὁ κακῶ, τῆ πόλει ταύτῃ μάντις καὶ ποιητής, ὅστις ἐκεῖνος ἢν, ἐκίνησεν καὶ παρώρμησεν καθ’ ἡμῶν τὰ πλῆθ’ τῶν ἐθνῶν, εἰς τὴν ἐπιχώριον αὐτοῦ δεοσοδαιμονίαι ἀναρριπίσας·
 οἳ δ’ ἐρεθισθέντες ὑπ’ αὐτοῦ κα πάσης ἐξουσίας εἰς ἀνοσιουργίαν λαβόμενοι, μόνη εὐσέβειαν τὴν θρῃσκείαν τῶν δαιμόνων ταύτην ὑπ’ ἔλαβον, τὸ καθ’ ἡμῶν φονᾶν.
 “ ΙΙρῶτον οὖν πρεσβύτην, Μητρᾶν ὀνόματι, συναρ πάσαντες καὶ κελεύσαντες ἄθεα λέγειν ῥήματα,μ(??) πειθόμενον, ξύλοις τε παίοντες τὸ σῶμα καὶ καλά ὀξέσιν τὸ πρόσωπον καὶ τοὺς ὀφθαλμοὺς κεντοῦντες ἀγαγόντες εἰς τὸ προάστεον, κατελιθοβόλησαν.
“ Εἶτα πιστὴν γυναῖκα, Κΐνταν καλουμένην, ἐπ’ τὸ εἰδωλεῖον ἀγαγόντες, ἠνάγκαζον προσκυνεῖν ἀποστρεΦομένην δὲ καὶ βδελυττομένην ἐκδήσαντε τῶν ποδῶν διὰ πάσης τῆς πόλεως κατὰ τοῦ τρα χέος λιθοστρώτου σύροντες προσαρασσομένην τοῖ μυλιαίοις λίθοις, ἅμα καὶ μαστιγοῦντες, ἐπὶ τό αὐτὸν ἀγαγόντες κατέλευσαν τόπον.
 εἴθ’ ὁμο θυμαδὸν ἅπαντες ὥρμησαν ἐπὶ τὰς τῶν θεοσεβῶ οἰκίας, καὶ οὓς ἐγνώριζον ἕκαστοι γειτνιῶντας ἐπεισπεσόντες ἦγον ἐσύλων τε καὶ διήρπαζον,τ(??) μὲν τιμιώτερα τῶν κειμηλίων νοσφιζόμενοι,τ δὲ εὐτελέστερα καὶ ὅσα ἐκ ξύλων ἐπεποίητ διαρριπτοῦντες καὶ κατακάοντες ἐν ταῖς ὁδοῖ ἑαλωκυίας ὑπὸ πολεμίων πόλεως παρεῖχον θέ ἐξέκλινον δὲ καὶ ὑπανεχώρουν οἱ ἀδελφοὶ καὶ ἁρπαγὴν τῶν ὑπαρχόντων ὁμοίως ἐκείνοις οἷςκ’ Παῦλος ἐμαρτύρησεν, μετὰ χαρᾶς προσεδέξα καὶ οὐκ οἶδ’ εἴ τις, πλὴν εἰ μή πού τις εἷς ἐμπέσω μέχρι γε τούτου τὸν κύριον ἠρνήσατο.
 us, blrt it preceded it bya whole year;
 and that prophet and creator οf evilsfor this eity, whoever he was, was beforehand in stirring and inciting the masses οf the heathen against us, fanning anew the flame of their native superstition.
 Aroused by him and seizing upon all authority for their unholy deeds, they conceived that this kind of worship of their gods— the thirsting for οur blood—was the only formof piety.
“ First, then, they seized an old man named Metras, and badehim utter blasphemous words;
 and when le refused to οbey they belaboured his body with udgels, stabbed his face and eyeswith sharp reeds, and leading him to the suburbs stoned him.
“ Then they ledawoman called Quinta,a believer,the idol temple, and were for forcing herto worship.
 But when she turned away and showed her lisgust, they bound her by the feet and dragged her through the whole city over the rough pavement, hat shewas bruised bythebig stones, beating her ll the while;
 and bringing her to the same place hey stoned her to death.
 Then with one accord they II rushed to the houses of the godly, and, falling ach upon those whom they recognized as neighbours, hey harried, spoiled and plundered them, appropriting the more valuable of their treasures, and scatterng and burning in the streets the cheaper articles and uch as were made of wood, until they gave the city he appearance of having been captured by enemies.
 ut the brethren gave wayand gradually retired, and, like those of whom Paul also testified, they took yfully the spoiling of their possessions.
 ΑndI now not there be — save, it mayit be.
 some single one who fell into their— who up to the resent has denied the Lord.
“ Ἀλλὰ καὶ τὴν θαυμασιωτάτην τότε παρθένον πρεσβῦτιν Ἀπολλωνίαν διαλαβόντες, τοὺς μὲν ὀδόντας ἅπαντας κόπτοντες τὰς σιαγόνας ἐξήλασαν πυρὰν δὲ νήσαντες πρὸ τῆς πόλεως ζῶσαν ἠπείλουν κατακαύαειν, εἰ μὴ συνεκφωνήσειεν αὐτοῖς τὰ τῆς ἀσεβείας κηρύγματα.
 ἡ δὲ ὑποπαραιτησαμένη βραχὺ καὶ ἀνεθεῖσα, συντόνως ἐπήδησεν εἰς τὸ πῦρ, καὶ καταπέφλεκται.
 “ Σεραπίωνά τε καταλαβόντες ἐφέστιον, σκληραῖς βασάνοις αἰκισάμενοι καὶ πάντα τὰ ἄρθρα διακλάσαντες, ἀπὸ τοῦ ὑπερῴου πρηνῆ κατέρριψαν.
“ Οὐδεμία δὲ ὁδός, οὐ λεωφόρος, οὐ στενωπὸς ἡμῖν βάσιμος ἦν, οὐ νύκτωρ, οὐ μεθ’ ἡμέραν, ἀεὶ καὶ πανταχοῦ πάντων κεκραγότων, εἰ μὴ τὰ δύσφημά τις ἀνυμνοίη ῥήματα, τοῦτον εὐθέως δεῖν αύρεσθαί τε καὶ πίμπρασθαι.
 καὶ ταῦτα ἐπὶ πολὺ μὲν τοῦτον ἤκμασεν τὸν τρόπον, διαδεξαμένη δὲ τοὺς ἀθλίους ἡ στάσις καὶ πόλεμος ἐμφύλιος τὴν καθ’ ἡμῶν ὠμότητα πρὸς ἀλλήλους αὐτῶν ἔτρεφεν, καὶ σμικρὸν μὲν προσανεπνεύσαμεν, ἀσχολίαν τοῦ πρὸς ἡμᾶς θυμοῦ λαβόντων, εὐθέως δὲ ἡ τῆς βασιλείας ἐκείνης τῆς εὐμενεστέρας ἡμῖν μεταβολὴ διήγγελται, καὶ πολὺς ὁ τῆς ἐφ’ ἡμᾶς ἀπειλῆς φόβος ἀνετείνετο.
 καὶ δὴ καὶ παρῆν τὸ πρόσταγμα, αὐτὸ σχεδὸν ἐκεῖνο οἷον τὸ προρρηθὲν ὑπὸ τοῦ κυρίου ἡμῶν παρὰ βραχὺ τὸ φοβερώτατον, ὡς, εἰ δυνατόν, σκανδαλίσαι καὶ τοὺς ἐκλεκτούς.
 πλῆ πάντες γε κατεπτήχεσαν·
 καὶ πολλοὶ μὲν εὐθέως τῶν περιφανεστέρων, οἳ μὲν ἀπήντων δεδιότες, δὲ δημοσιεύοντες ὑπὸ τῶν πράξεων ἤγοντο,“ Moreover, they seized then that marvellousagedvirgin Apollonia, broke out all her teeth with blows οn her jaws, and piling upa pyre before the city threatened to burn her alive, if she refused to recite along with them their blasphemous sayings.
 But she asked fora brief space, and, being released, without flinching1 she leaped into the fire and was consumed.
“ Serapion they laid hold of athisown home, broke all his limbs by the severe tortures they inflicted, and cast him down head foremost from the upper story.
“ Νow therewas no way,no thoroughfare, no alley by which we could go, either by night or during the day:
 alaways and everywhere all were shouting, that hewhodid not joininthe chorus of blasphemy must immediately be dragged off and burnt.
 Αnd this state of things continued at its heightfora long time.
 But strife and civil war came upon the wretehed men, and turnedon themselves the fury of which we had been the object;
 and for a brief space we breathed again, since they had no time to indulge their anger against us.
 Straightway, however,the news was spread abroad of the change from that rule that had been more kindly to us,2 and great was the fear of threatened punishment that hung over us.
 And, what is more,the edict arriVed, and it was almost like that which was predictedby our Lord, wellnigh the most terrible of all, so as, if possible, to cause to stumble even the elect.
 3 Ηowsoever that be, all cowered with fear.
 Αnd of many of the moreeminent persons, some came forwardimmediately through fear, others in public positions were to do so by their business, and others were δὲ ὑπὸ τῶν ἀμφ’ αὐτοῖς ἐφείλκοντο·
 ὀνομαστί τε καλούμενοι ταῖς ἀνάγνοις καὶ ἀνιέροις θυσίαις προσῄεσαν, οἳ μὲν ὠχριῶντες καὶ τρέμοντες, ὥσπερ οὐ θύσοντες, ἀλλ’ αὐτοὶ θύματα καὶ αφάγια τοῖς εἰδώλοις ἐσόμενοι, ὡς ὑπὸ πολλοῦ τοῦ περιεατῶτος δήμου χλεύην αὐτοῖς ἐπιφέρεσθαι καὶ δήλους μὲν εἶναι πρὸς πάντα δειλοὺς ὑπάρχοντας, καὶ πρὸς τὸ τεθνάναι καὶ πρὸς τὸ θῦααι·
 οἳ δέ τινες ἑτοιμότερον τοῖς βωμοῖς προσέτρεχον, ἰσχυριζόμενοι τῆ θρασύτητι τὸ μηδὲ πρότερον Χριστιανοὶ γεγονέναι, περὶ ὧν ἡ τοῦ κυρίου πρόρρησις ἀληθεστάτη ὅτι δυσκόλως σωθήσονται.
 τῶν δὲ λοιπῶν οἳ μὲν ἕποντο τούτοις ἑκατέροις, οἳ δὲ ἔφευγον·
 οἳ δὲ ἡλίσκοντο, καὶ τούτων οἳ μὲν ἄχρι δεσμῶν καὶ φυλακῆς χωρήσαντες, καὶ τινὲς καὶ πλείονας ἡμέρας καθειρχθέντες, εἶτα καὶ πρὶν ἐπὶ δικαστήριον ἐλθεῖν, ἐξωμόσαντο, οἳ δὲ καὶ βασἀνοις ἐπὶ ποσὸν ἐγκαρτερήσαντες, πρὸς τὸ ἑξῆς ἀπεῖπον.
 “ Οἱ δὲ στερροὶ καὶ μακάριοι στῦλοι τοῦ κυρίου κραταιωθέντες ὑπ’ αὐτοῦ καὶ τῆς ἰσχυρᾶς ἐν αὐτοῖς πίστεως ἀξίαν καὶ ἀνάλογον δύναμιν καὶ καρτερίαν λαβόντες, θαυμαστοὶ γεγόνσιν αὐτοῦ τῆς βασιλεία μάρτυρες·
 ὧν πρῶτος Ἰουλιανός, ἄνθρωπος ποδαγρός, μὴ στῆναι, μὴ βαδίσαι δυνάμενος, σὺν ἑτέροις δύο τοῖς φέρουσιν αὐτὸν προσήχθη·
 ὧν ὁ μὲν ἕτερος εὐθὺς ἠρνήσατο, ὁ δ’ ἕτερος, Κρονίων ὀνόματι, ἐπίκλην δὲ Εὔνους, καὶ αὐτὸς ὁ πρεσβύτης Ἰουλιανὸς ὁμολογήσαντες τὸν κύριον, διὰ πάσης τῆς πόλεως, μεγίστης οὔσης ὡς ἴστε, καμήλοις ἐποχούμενοι καὶ μετέωροι μαστιγούμενοι, τέλος ἀσβέστῳ, περικεχυμένου τοῦ δήμου παντός, κα dragged by those around them.
 Called by approached the impure and unholy sacrifices, some pale and trembling, as if they were not for sacrificing but rather to be themselves the sacrifices and victimsto the idols, so that the large crowd that stood around heaped mockery upon them, and itwas evident that they were by nature cowards in everything, cowards both to die and to sacrifice.
 But others ran eageriy towardsthe altars, affirming by their forwardness that they had not been christians even formerly;
 concerning whom the Lordvery truly predicted that they shall hardly be saved.
 1 Of the rest, some followedone or otherof these, others fled;
 some were captured, and οf these some went as far as bonds and imprisonment, and certain, when they had been shut up for many days, then forswore themselves even before coming into court, while others, who remained firm for a certain time under tortures, subsequently gave in.
“ But the firmand blessedpillars ofthe Lord, being strengthenedby Ηim, and receiving power and stedfasnessin due measure according to the mighty faith that was in them, proved themselves admirable martyrs οf Ηis kingdom.
 Of these the first was Julian,a man who suffered from gout, unable to stand or walk.
 Ηe was brought up with two others who carried him, of whom the one straightway denied;
 the οther, Cronion by name,but surnamed Eunus, and the οld man Julian himself, confessed the Lord, and were carried upon eamels through the whole city, very large in extent as ye know, and thus uplifted were beaten, and inthe end, surrounded by all the ετάκησαν.
 στρατιώτης τε αὐτοῖς παραστὰς καὶ τοῖς ἐφυβρίζουσιν ἐναντιωθείς, ἐκείνων προσαχθεὶς ὁ ἀνδρειότατος ὁπλομάχος τοῦ θεοῦ Βησᾶς κἀν τῷ μεγάλῳ πολέμῳ τῷ περὶ τῆς εὐσεβείας ἀριστεύσας, ἀπετμήθη τὴν κεφαλήν.
 καί τις ἕτερος, τὸ μὲν γένος Λίβυς, τὴν δὲ προσηγορίαν ἅμα καὶ τὴν εὐλογίαν ἀληθὴς Μάκαρ, προτροπῆς αὐτῷ πολλῆς ὑπὸ τοῦ δικαστοῦ πρὸς ἄρνησιν γενομένης, οὐχ ὑπαχθεὶς ζῶν καταπέφλεκται.
 Ἐπίμαχός τε μετ’ αὐτοὺς καὶ ᾿Αλέξανδρος μετὰ πολὺν ὃν ἔμειναν δεσμῶται χρόνον, μυρίας διενεγκόντες ἀλγηδόνας ξυστῆρας μάστιγας, πυρὶ ἀσβέστῳ καὶ οὗτοι διεχύθησαν.
“ Καὶ σὺν αὐτοῖς γυναῖκες τέσσαρες, Ἀμμωνάριόν τε ἁγία παρθένος, πάνυ φιλονείκως αὐτὴν ἐπὶ πλεῖστον τοῦ δικαστοῦ βασανίσαντος, ἅτε προαπγφηναμένην ὅτι μηδὲν ὧν ἐκεῖνος κελεύοι φθέγξεται, ἀληθεύσασα τὴν ἐπαγγελίαν, ἀπήχθη·
 αἱ δὲ λοιπαί, ἡ σεμνοτάτη πρεσβῦτις Μερκουρία καὶ ἡ πολύπαις μέν, οὐχ ὑπὲρ τὸν κύριον δὲ ἀγαπήσασα τὰ τέκνα Διονυσία, καταιδεσθέντος εἰς ἀνήνυτον ἔτι βασανίζειν καὶ ὑπὸ γυναικῶν ἡττᾶσθαι τοῦ ἡγεμόνος, αιδήρῳ τεθνᾶσιν, μηκέτι βασάνων πεῖραν λαβοῦσαι·
 τὰς γὰρ ὑπὲρ πασῶν ἡ πρόμαχος Ἀμμωνάριον ἀνεδέδεκτο.
 “ Ἥρων δὲ καὶ Ἀτὴρ καὶ Ἰσίδωρος Αἰγύπτιοι καὶ σὺν αὐτοῖς παιδάριον ὡς πεντεκαιδεκαέτης ὁ Διοσκόρος παρεδόθησαν·
 καὶ πρῶτον τὸ μειράκιον λόγοις τε ἀπατᾶν ὡς εὐπαράγωγον καὶ βασάνοις καταναγκάζειν ὡς εὐένδοτον πειρωμένου, οὔτ’ ἐπείσθη οὔτ’ εἶξεν ὁ Διοσκόρος·
 τοὺς δὲ λοιποὺς people, burnt in quicklime.
 Α soldier who stood byas they were being led off, opposed those who insulted them;
 and, when the crowd cried out, Besas, that brave warrior of God,was brought up, and after excelling in the great war of pietywas beheaded.
 Αnd another,a Libyan by race, Μacar, 1 true both to his name and the Lord 's benediction, thogh the judge urged him strongly to deny, wasnot induced,and so was burnt alive.
 Αnd after these Epimachus and Alexander, when they had remaineda long time in prison, enduring to the countless agonies from scrapers and scourges, were also burnt in quicklime.
“ And with themfour women:
 Ammonarion,a holy virgin, though tortured vigorously by the judge fora very long time, inamueh as she had made it plain beforehand that she would not utter anything of what he bade her, kept truetoher promise,and was led away.
 And as to the rest, Mercuria,an aged womanof reverend mien, and Dionysia, the mother indeedof many children, who yet did not love them above the Lord, when the governor was ashamed to ply continued torture allto no end,and to beworstedby women,— they were put to death by the andsohad trial ofnofurther tortures.
 For these Ammonarion, true champion, had taken upon herself on behalf of all.
“ Hero andΑter and Isidore, Egyptians,and with thema young boy of about fifteen named were delivered up.
 Αnd at first the governortried to wheedletheΙad by words, as one easily led astray, and to compel him by tortures, as one that would easily give in;
 but Dioscrous neither obeyed nor ἀγριώτατα καταξήνας, ἐγκαρτερήσαντας πυρὶ καὶ τούτους ἔδωκεν.
 τὸν δὲ Διόακορον ἐλλαμπρυνάμενόν τε δημοσίᾳ καὶ σοφώτατα πρὸς τὰς ἰδίας πεύσεις ἀποκρινάμενον θαυμάσας, παρῆκεν, ὑπέρθεσιν φήσας εἰς μετάνοιαν αὐτῷ διὰ τὴν ἡλικίαν ἐπιμετρεῖν·
 καὶ νῦν ὁ θεοπρεπέστατος σὺν ἡμῖν ἐστιν Διοσκόρος, εἰς μακρότερον τὸν ἀγῶνα διαρκέστερον μείνας τὸν ἆθλον.
 “ Νεμεσίων δέ τις, κἀκεῖνος Αἰγύπτιος, ἐσυκοφαντήθη μὲν ὡς δὴ σύνοικος λῃστῶν, δὲ ταύτην παρὰ τῷ ἑκατοντάρχῳ τὴν ἀλλοτριωτάτην διαβολήν, καταμηνυθεὶς ὡς Χριστιανὸς ἧκεν δεαμώτης ἐπὶ τὸν ἡγούμενον·
 ὁ δὲ ἀδικώτατος διπλαῖς αὐτὸν ἢ τοὺς λῃστὰς ταῖς τε βασάνοις καὶ ταῖς μάστιξιν λυμηνάμενος, τῶν λῃστῶν κατέφλεξεν τιμηθέντα’ τον μακάριον τῷ τοῦ χριστοῦ παραδείγματι.
 “ Ἀθρόον δέ τι σύνταγμα στρατιωτικόν, Ἄμμων καὶ Ζήνων καὶ Πτολεμαῖος καὶ Ἰγγένης καὶ σὺν αὐτοῖς πρεαβύτης Θεόφιλος, εἱστήκεισαν πρὸ τοῦ δικαατηρίου·
 κρινομένου δή τινος ὡς Χριστιανοῦ καὶ πρὸς ἄρνησιν ἤδη ῥέποντος, ἐπρίοντο παρεστηκότες, καὶ τοῖς τε προσώποις ἐνένευον καὶ τὰς χεῖρας ἀνέτεινον καὶ συνεσχηματίζοντο τοῖς αώμααιν.
 ἐπιατροφῆς δὲ πάντων πρὸς αὐτοὺς γενομένης, πρίν τινας αὐτῶν ἄλλως λαβέσθαι φθάσαντες ἐπὶ τὸ βάθρον ἀνέδραμον, εἶναι Χριστιανοὶ λέγοντες, ὡς τόν τε ἡγεμόνα καὶ τοὺς συνέδρους ἐμφόβους γενέσθαι, καὶ τοὺς μὲν εὐθαρσεστάτους ἐφ’ οἷς πείσονται, φαίνεσθαι, τοὺς δὲ δικάζοντας ἀποδειλιᾶν.
 καὶ οὗτοι μὲν ἐκ δικαστηρίων ἐνεπόμπευσαν καὶ ἠγαλλιάσαντο yielded.
 The rest he savagely torein pieces, and, when they endured, cοmmitted them also to the flames.
 But, marvelling at the splendidbearing of Dioscorusin public and the wickedse answers he made to his questions in private, he let him off.
 saying that he grantedhima period ofdelayto repent,on account ofhis youth.
 Αnd now the most godly Dioscorusis with us, haring remained fοra still longer cοntest anda more lasting cοnffict.
“Α certain Νamesion, he alsοan Εgyptian,was fahely accused of consorting with rοbbers, and when he had cleared himself before the centuriοn of that charge sο fοreign to his character, he was informed against as beingga christian, and came bound before the gοvernοr.
 Ηe mοst unjusfly inflicted on him tmiceceas many tortures and scourgings as he didon the robbers, and bumt hI·
m between them, thus honouringng him, happy man, with a likenessto Christ.
“Α whole band of soldieriers, Αmmοn and Ζeno and Ptolemy and Ingenuus,and with themanold man Theophilus, had takentheir stand before the cοurt.
 Νow a certainman was being triedasa Christian, and at that moment was inclining towards denial, when these men standing byground their teeth, cast looks at him, sοetched out their hands and made gestures with their bodies.
 Αnd when all turned towards them, befοre anyone could οtherwise seize them, they ran of their own accord tο the prisoner’s dock saying that they were christians;
 so that boththe govemor andhisassessors were filledwith fear, and those who were on their trial showed themselves very courageous in the face of their future sufferings, while the Judges were affrighted.
 So these men marched frοm the court in proud pro- μαρτυρίᾳ, θριαμβεύοντος αὐτοὺς ἐνδόξως τοῦ θεοῦ.
 XLII.
 “ Ἄλλοι δὲ πλεῖστοι κατὰ πόλεις καὶ κώμας ὑπὸ τῶν ἐθνῶν διεσπάσθησαν, ὧν παραδείγματος ἕνεκεν ἐπιμνησθήσομαι.
 Ἰσχυίων ἐπετρόπευέν τινι τῶν ἀρχόντων ἐπὶ μιαθῷ.
 τοῦτον ὁ μιαθοδότης ἐκέλευσεν θῦσαι, μὴ πειθόμενον ὕβριζεν, ἐμμένοντα προεπηλάκιζεν, ὑφισταμένου, βακτηρίαν μεγίστην λαβὼν διὰ τῶν ἐντέρων καὶ τῶν σπλάγχνων διώσας, ἀπέκτεινεν.
“ Τί δεῖ λέγειν τὸ πλῆθος τῶν ἐν ἐρημίαις καὶ ὄρεσιν πλανηθέντων, ὑπὸ Λιμοῦ καὶ δίψης κρύους καὶ νόσων καὶ λῃστῶν καὶ θηρίων διεφαρμένων;
 ὧν οἱ περιγενόμενοι τῆς ἐκείνων εἰσὶν ἐκλογῆς καὶ νίκης μάρτυρες, ἓν δὲ καὶ τούτων εἰς δήλωσιν ἔργον παραθήσομαι.
 Χαιρήμων ἢν ὑπέργηρως τῆς Νείλου καλουμένης πόλεως ἐπίσκοπος.
 οὗτος εἰς τὸ Ἀράβιον ὄρος ἅμα τῆ συμβίῳ ἑαυτοῦ φυγών, οὐκ ἐπανελήλυθεν, οὐδὲ ἐδυνήθησαν ἰδεῖν οὐκέτι, καίτοι πολλὰ διερευνησάμενοι, οἱ ἀδελφοὶ οὔτε αὐτοὺς οὔτε τὰ σώματα.
 πολλοὶ δὲ οἱ κατ’ αὐτὸ τὸ Ἀραβικὸν ὄρος ἐξανδραποδισθέντες ὑπὸ βαρβάρων Σαρακηνῶν·
 ὧν οἳ μὲν μόλις ἐπὶ πολλοῖς χρήμασιν ἐλυτρώθησαν, οἵ δὲ μέχρι νῦν οὐδέπω.
“ καὶ ταῦτα διεξῆλθον οὐ μάτην, ἀδελφέ,ἀλλ ἵνα εἰδῇς ὅσα καὶ ἡλίκα δεινὰ παρ’ ἡμῖν συνέβη·
 ὧν οἱ μᾶλλον πεπειραμένοι πλείονα ἂν εἰδεῖεν.
” Εἶτα τούτοις ἐπιφέρει μετὰ βραχέα λέγων·
“ αὐτοὶ τοίνυν οἱ θεῖοι μάρτυρες παρ’ ἡμῖν, οἱ νῦν τοῦ Χριστοῦ πάρεδροι καὶ τῆς βασιλείας αὐτοῦ cession, exulting in their witness, God spreading abroad their fame gloriously.
 XLII.
“ Αnd many othersthroughout the citiesandvillages were tornin piecesby the heathen, οf whomI shall mention οne as an example.
 Ischyrion was acting as the hired steward of one ofthe rulers.
 Ηis employer bade him sacrifice;
 when he refused he insulted him, when he abode by his refusal he abused him foully;
 and as he still remained firm he tookavery large stick, thrust it through his bowelsand vital οrgans, and so killed him.
“ What needisthere to speakofthe multitude of those who wandered in deserts and mountains, 1 perished by hunger and thirst and frost and diseases and robbers and wild beasts? Such of them as survive bear testimony to their election and victory;
 but οne factin connexion with these men alsoI shall adduce as evidence.
 Chaeremon was bishop of the city called Nilopolis, and of extreme age.
 Ηe fled tothe Αrabian mountain with his wife,2and never returned, nor couldthe brethren ever lay eyes again either on them οr their bodies, although they made a long and thorough search.
 But many in that same Αrabian mountain were reduced to utter slavery by barbarian Saracens.
 Of these some were with difficulty ransomed for large sums, others havenotyet been, up to this day.
“ ΑndI have notgiven this account, brother, to purpose, but that you may know all the terrible things that happened with us.
 Those who have had a larger experience of them would know more examples.
“ Then, aftera little,he adds as follows:
“ Thererore the divine martyrs themselves among us, who nowareassessors οf Christ, and share the fellowship οf κοινωνοὶ καὶ μέτοχοι τῆς κρίαεως αὐτοῦ καὶ συνδικάζοντες αὐτῷ, τῶν παραπεπτωκότων ἀδελΦῶν τινας ὑπευθύνους τοῖς τῶν θυσιῶν γενομένους προσελάβοντο, καὶ τὴν καὶ μετάνοιαν αὐτῶν ἰδόντες δεκτήν τε γενέσθαι δυναμένην τῶ μὴ βουλομένω καθόλου τὸν θάνατονμ’μ’μ’ ὢ του ἁμαρτωλοῦ ὡς τὴν μετάνοιαν δοκιμάσαντες, εἰσεδέξαντο καὶ συνήγαγον καὶ συνέστησαν προσευχῶν αὐτοῖς καὶ ἑστιάσεων τί οὖν ἡμῖν, ἀδελφοί, περὶ τούτων συμβουλεύετε τί ἡμῖν πρακτέον;
 σύμψηφοι καὶ ὁμογνώμονες αὐτοῖς καταστῶμεν καὶ τὴν κρίαιν αὐτῶν καὶ τὴν χάριν φυλάξωμεν καὶ τοῖς ἐλεηθεῖσιν ὑπ’ χρηστευσώμεθα, ἢ τὴν κρίσιν αὐτῶν ποιησώμεθα καὶ δοκιμαστὰς αὑτοὺς τῆς γνώμης ἐπιστήσωμεν καὶ τὴν χρηστότητα καὶ τὴν τάξιν ἀνασκευάσωμεν;
 Ταῦτα δ’ εἰκότως ὁ Διονύσιος παρατέθειται, τὸν περὶ τῶν ἐξησθενηκότων κατὰ τὸν τοῦ διωγμοῦ καιρὸν ἀνακινῶν λόγον, XLIII.
 ἐπειδήπερ τῇ κατὰ τούτων ἀρθεὶς ὑπερηφανίᾳ Νοουάτος, τῆς Ῥωμαίων ἐκκλησίας πρεαβύτερος, ὡς μηκέτ’ οὔσης αὐτοῖς σωτηρίας ἐλπίδος μηδ’ εἰ πάντα τὰ εἰς ἐπιστροφὴν γνησίαν καὶ καθαρὰν ἐπιτελοῖεν, ἰδίας αἱρέαεως τῶν κατὰ λογισμοῦ φυσίωσιν Καθαροὺς ἑαυτοὺς ἀποφηνάντων ἀρχηγὸς καθίσταται·
 ἐφ’ ᾧ συνόδου μεγίστης ἐπὶ Ῥώμης συγκροτηθείσης ἑξήκοντα μὲν τὸν ἀριθμὸν ἐπισκόπων, πλειόνωνδ’ ἔτι μᾶλλον πρεσβυτέρων τε His kingdom, and take part in Ηis decisions and judge along with Ηim, have espoused the cause of certain of the fallen brethren who became answerable for the charge of;
 and seeing their conversion and repentance, they judgedit had the power to prove acceptable to Ηim who hath no pleasure at all in the death of the sinner, but rather his repentance;
 and so they received and admitted them to the worship οf the Church1as consistentes, 2 and gave them fellowship in their prayers and feasts.
 What then doye counsel us, brethren,on these matters? What arewe to do?Αre we tobeof like opinionandmind with them, uphold their decision and concession, and dealkindly with those they pitied?Or shallwe esteem their decision unjust, and set ourselves up as critics of their opinion, cause griefto kindness, and do away with their arrangement?’’ Νow these wordsDionysius added suitably, raising the question about those who had proved weak in the time of persecution, XLIII.
 since Novatus, 3 a presbyter of the churchofthe Romans,being lifted up by arroganceagainst these,as if therewas no longerany hope ofsalvationfor them, not even if they were to perform everything thata genuine conversion anda pure confession demand, became the leader ofa separate sect of those who, in their pride of mind, styled themselves Ρuritans.
 Whereupon a very large synod was assembledat Rome,of sixty bishop anda still greater number οf presbyters οf penitents.
 They were admitted to the eucharistic prayers, but debarred from communion.
 καὶ διακόνων, ἰδίως τε κατὰ τὰς λοιπὰς ἐπαρχίας τῶν κατὰ χώραν ποιμένων περὶ τοῦ πρακτέου διασκεψαμένων, δόγμα παρίσταται τοῖς τὸν μὲν Νοουάτον ἅμα τοῖς σὺν αὐτῷ τούς τε συνευδοκεῖν τῇ μισαδέλφῳ ἀπανθρωποτάτῃ γνώμῃ τἀνδρὸς προαιροῦ μένους ἐν ἀλλοτρίοις τῆς ἐκκλησίας ἡγεῖσθαι, τοὺς δὲ τῆ σαμφορᾷ περιπεπτωκότας τῶν ἀδελφῶν ἰᾶσθαι καὶ θεραπεύειν τοῖς τῆς μετανοίας φαρμάκοις.
 Ἦλθον δ’ οὖν εἰς ἡμᾶς ἐπιατολαὶ Κορνηλίου Ρωμαίων ἐπιακόπου πρὸς τὸν τῆς Ἀντιοχέων ἐκκλησίας Φάβιον, δηλοῦσαι τὰ περὶ τῆς συνόδου καὶ τὰ δόξαντα τοῖς κατὰ τὴν Ἰταλίαν καὶ Ἀφρικὴν καὶ τὰς αὐτόθι χώρας, καὶ ἄλλαι πάλιν, Ῥωμαϊκὴ φωνῇ συντεταγμέναι, Κυπριανοῦ καὶ τῶν ἅμ’ αὐτῷ κατὰ τὴν Ἀφρικήν, δι’ ὧν τὸ καὶ αὐτοὺς συνευδοκεῖν τῷ δεῖν τυγχάνειν τοὺς πεπειρασμένους ἐνεφαίνετο καὶ τῷ χρῆναι εὐλόγως τῆς καθολικῆς ἐκκλησίας ἐκκήρυκτον ποιήσασθαι τὸν τῆς αἱρέσεως τε ὁμοίως τοὺς συναπαγομένους αὐτῷ.
 ταύταις ἄλλη τις ἐπιστολὴ συνῆπτο τοῦ Κορνηλίου περὶ τῶν κατὰ τὴν σύνοδον ἀρεσάντων καὶ πάλιν περὶ τῶν κατὰ Νοουάτον πραχθέντων·
 ἀφ’ ἦς καὶ μέρη παραθέσθαι οὐδὲν ἂν κωλύοι, ὅπως εἰδεῖεν τὰ κατ’ αὐτὸν οἱ τῇδε ἐντυγχάνοντες τῆ γραφῆ.
 τὸν δὴ οὖν Φάβιον ἀναδιδάσκων ὁποῖός τις ὁ Νοουάτος γεγόνοι τὸν τρόπον, αὐτὰ δὴ ταῦτα γράφει ὁ Κορνήλιος·
 “ “ ἵνα δὲ γνῷς ὅτι πρόπαλαι ὀρεγόμενος τῆς ἐπισκοπῆς ὁ θαυμάσιος οὗτος καὶ κρύπτων ἐν αὑτῷ τὴν προπετῆ ταύτην αὐτοῦ ἐπιθυμίαν ἐλάνθανεν, ἐπικαλύμματι τῆς αὐτοῦ and deacons, while in the restofthe provinces the pastors in their several regions individually considered the question as to what was tobe done.
 It was unanimously decreed that Νovatus, together with the partnersofhis arrogance,and those who decided to agree with the man's brother-hating and most inhuman opinion, should be considered as strangers to the Church, but that such of the brethren as had fallen into the misfortune should be treated and and restored with the medicines of repentance.
 Νow there have reached usa letter of Cornelius, bishop of the Romans,to Fabius, bishop of the churchofthe Αntiochenes, telling the fects concerning the Roman Synod, and what was decreed by them of Italy and Africa and the regions thereabout;
;
 and, again, another of Cyprian and of those with him in Αfrica, composed inthe Latin language, in whichitwas made clear that they also agreed that those who had suffered trial should meet with succour, and thatin the reasonof things it was fitting that the leader of the heresy should be excommunicated fromthe Catholic Church, and likewise all those who were led away with him.
 To these was subjoine3da certain οther letter of Cornelius,on the resolutions of the synod;
 and, again, another on the doings of Novatus.
 There is nothing to prevent me from quoting parts of this last, so that those who read this book may know about him.
 Ιn explaining, then, to Fabius what kind of manner ofman Novatus was, Cornelius writes these very words:
 ““ But thatyoumay know thatfora long time back this marvellous fellow has been seeking the officeofa bishop,and has succeeded in concealing in his heart this his violent desire, using ἀπονοίας τῷ κατ’ ἀρχὰς σὺν αὑτῷ τοὺς ἐσχηκέναι χρώμενος, εἰπεῖν βούλομαι.
 Μάξιμος πρεσβύτερος τῶν παρ’ ἡμῖν καὶ Οὐρβανός, τὴν ἐξ ὁμολογίας δόξαν ἀρίστην Σιδόνιός τε καὶ Κελερῖνος, ἀνὴρ ὃς πάσας βασάνους διὰ τὸν τοῦ θεοῦ ἔλεον καρτερικώτατα διενέγκας καὶ τῆ ῥώμη τῆς αὐτοῦ πίστεως τῆς σαρκὸς ἐπιρρώσας, κατὰ κράτος νενίκηκεν τὸν ἀντικείμενον, οὗτοι δὴ οὖν οἱ ἄνδρες κατανοήσαντες αὐτὸν καὶ καταφωράσαντες τὴν ἐν αὐτῷ πανουργίαν τε καὶ παλιμβολίαν τάς τε ἐπιορκίας καὶ τὰς φευδολογίας καὶ τὴν ἀκοινωνησίαν αὐτοῦ καὶ λυκοφιλίαν, ἐπανῆλθον εἰς τὴν ἁγίαν ἐκκλησίαν, καὶ ἅπαντα αὐτοῦ τὰ τεχνάσματα καὶ πονηρεύματα, ἃ ἐκ πολλοῦ ἔχων ἐν ἑαυτῷ ὑπεστέλλετο, ἱκανῶν τοῦτο μὲν ἐπισκόπων τοῦτο δὲ πρεσβυτέρων καὶ λαικῶν ἀνδρῶν παμπόλλων, ἐξήγγειλαν, ἀποδυρόμενοι καὶ μεταγινώσκοντες ἐφ’ οἷς τῷ δολερῷ ῥῷ καὶ κακοήθει θηρίῳ πρὸς ὀλίγον χρόνον τῆς ἐκκλησίας ἀπελείδθησαν.
” Εἶτὰ μετὰ βραχέα φηαίν·
“ ἀμήχανον ὅσην, ἀγαπητὲ ἀδελφέ, τροπὴν καὶ μεταβολὴν ἐν βραχεῖ καιρῷ ἐθεασάμεθα ἐπ’ αὐτοῦ γεγενημένην.
 ὁ γάρ τοι λαμπρότατος καὶ δι’ ὅρκων φοβερῶν τινων πιστούμενος τὸ μηδ’ ὅλως ἐπισκοπῆς αἰφνίδιον ἐπίσκοπος ὥσπερ ἐκ μαγγάνου τινὸς εἰς τὸ μέσον ῥιφεὶς ἀναφαίνεται.
 οὗτος γάρ τοι ὁ δογματιστής, ὁ τῆς ἐκκλησιαστικῆς ὑπερασπιστής, ὁπηνίκα παρασπᾶσθαί τε τὴν μὴ δοθεῖσαν αὐτῷ ἄνωθεν ἐπεχείρει, δύο ἑαυτῷ κοινωνούς, ἀπεγνωκότας τῆς as a veil for his insane folly the fact thathehad the confessors withhimfrom the beginning,I wish to speak.
 Maximus, one of our presbyters, and Urban, both of whom twice reaped the highest meed of renown by confession,and Sidonius,and Celerinus,a man who, by the mercyof God, bore with the utmost endurance all kindsof tortures,and by the strength οf his faith strengthened the weakness of his body, and so has mightily overcome the adversary — these men marked him, and detecting the craftiness and duplicity that was in him, his perjuriesand falsehoods,his unsociability and wolf- like friendship, returned tothe holy Church.
 Αnd all the knavish tricks and devices that he hadlong dissembled in his heart, they made known in the presence both of a number of bishops, and also οf very many presbyters and laymen, bewailing and repenting of the fact that fora brief space they had left the Church under the persuasion of this treacherous and malicious wild beast.
” Then shortly afterwards he says:
“ Ηow extraordinaryachange and transformation, brother beloved, we have beheld to have taken plaeein him inalittle whileḷ For in sooth this highly distinguished person, who was in the habit οf pledging himself by some terrible oaths in no wise to seek the office οfa bishop,of a sudden appears as a bishop as if he were cast into our midst by some contrivance.
 1 For in sooth this master οf doctrine, this champion of the Chrurch ' s discipline, when he was attempting to wrest and filch away the episcopate that was not given him from above, chose to himself two companions ΕUSEBIUS ἑαυτῶν σωτηρίας, ἐπελέξατο, ὡς ἄν εἰς τι μέρος καὶ ἐλάχιστον τῆς Ἰταλίας ἀποστείλῃ κἀκεῖθεν ἐπισκόπους τρεῖς, ἀνθρώπους καὶ ἁπλουστάτους, πλαστῇ τινι ἐπιχειρήσει ἐξαπατήσῃ, διαβεβαιούμενος καὶ διισχυριζόμενος δεῖν αὐτοὺς ἐν τάχει παραγενέσθαι εἰς Ῥώμην, δῆθεν πᾶσα ἥτις δήποτε οὖν διχοστασία σὺν καὶ ἑτέροις ἐπισκόποις καὶ αὐτῶν διαλυθῇ·
 οὓς παραγενομένους, ἅτε δή, ὡς ἔφθημεν λέγοντες, ἀνθρώπους ἁπλουστέρους περὶ τὰς πονηρῶν μηχανάς τε καὶ ῥᾳδιουργίας, συγκλεισθέντας ὑπό τινων ὁμοίων αὐτῷ τεταραγμένων ἀνθρώπων, ὥρᾳ δεκάτῃ, μεθύοντας καὶ κραιπαλῶντας, μετὰ βίας ἠνάγκασεν εἰκονικῇ τινι καὶ ματαίᾳ χειρεπιθεσίᾳ ἐπισκοπὴν αὐτῷ δοῦναι, ἐνέδρᾳ καὶ πανουργίᾳ, μὴ ἐπιβάλλουσαν αὐτῷ, ἐκδικεῖ·
 ἐξ ὧν εἷς μετ’ οὐ πολὺ ἐπανῆλθεν εἰς τὴν ἐκκλησίαν, ἀποδυρόμενος καὶ ἐξομολογοῦ μένος τὸ ἑαυτοῦ ἁμάρτημα, ᾧ καὶ ἐκοινωνήσαμεν λαικῷ, ὑπὲρ αὐτοῦ δεηθέντος παντὸς τοῦ παρόντος λαοῦ·
 καὶ τῶν λοιπῶν δὲ ἐπισκόπων διαδόχους εἰς τοὺς τόπους, ἐν οἷς ἦσαν, χειροτονήσαντες ἀπεστάλκαμεν.
 “‘O ἐκδικητὴς οὗν τοῦ εὐαγγελίου οὐκ ἠπίστατο ἕνα ἐπίσκοπον δεῖν εἶναι ἐν καθολικῇ ἐκκλησίᾳ, ἐν ἦ οὐκ ἠγνόει, πῶς γάρ;
 πρεσβυτέρους τεσσαράκοντα ἕξ, διακόνους ἑπτά, ἑπτά, ἀκολούθους δύο καὶ τεσσαράκοντα, ἐξ.
 ορκιστὰς δὲ καὶ ἀναγνώστας ἅμαπυλωροῖς καὶ πεντήκοντα, χήρας σὺν θλιβομένοις ὑπὲρ τὰς χιλίας πεντακοσίας, οὓς πάντας ἡ τοῦ χάρις καὶ φιλανθρωπία διατρέφει·
 ὃν οὐδὲ τοσοῦτο πλῆθος καὶ οὕτως ἀναγκαῖον ἐν τῆ ἐκκλησίᾳ, διὰ who had renouncedtheirown salvation, that he might send them to a small and very insignificant part of Italy, and entice thence by some made- up device three bishops, rough andvery simple men.
 Ηe confidently maintained and affirmed the necessity of their coming quicklyto Rome, on the pretext that any dissension whatsoever that had arisen might be ended by their activity as mediators, conjointly with other bishops.
 When they arrived, inasmuch as they were too simple, as we said before, for the unscrupulous devices of the wicked, they were shut up by certain disorderlymen like himself, and atthe tenth hour, when they were drunk, and sick with the after effects, he forcibly compelled them to give him a bishop 's office bya counterfeit and vain laying on of hands, an office that he assumed by crafty treachery since it did not fall to his lot.
 Οne of the bishops not long afterwards returned to the Church, bewailing and confessing his fault;
 with whom we hadcommunionasa layman,all the laity Ρresent interceding for him.
 And as forthe remaining bishops, to thesewe appointed successors, whom we sent into the places where they were.
“ This vindicator, then, of the gospel did not know that there should be one bishop ina catholic church, in which he was not ignorant( for how could he be?) that thereare forty- six presbyters, seven deacons, seven sub- deacons, forty-two acolytes, fifty-two exorcists,readers and door- keepers, above fifteen hundred widows and personsin distress,all of whom are supported by the grace and loving- kindness ofthe Master.
 But not even did this great multitude, so τῆς τοῦ θεοῦ προνοίας πλούσιός τε καἰ πληθύων ἀριθμὸς μετὰ μεγίστου καὶ ἀναριθμήτου λαοῦ, ἀπὸ τῆς τοιαύτης ἀπογνώαεώς τε καὶ ἀπαγορεύσεως ἐνέτρεφέν τε καὶ ἀνεκαλέσατο εἰς τὴν ἐκκλησίαν.’
 καὶ αὖθις μεθ’ ἕτερα τούτοις προστίθησιν ταῦτα·
 “ φέρε δή, ἑξῆς εἴπωμεν τίσιν ἔργοις ἢ τίσιν πολιτείαις τεθαρρηκὼς ἀντεποιήθη τῆς ἐπισκοπῆς.
 ἆρά γε διὰ τὸ ἐξ ἀρχῆς ἐν τῆ ἐκκλησίᾳ ἀνεστράδθαι καὶ πολλοὺς ἀγῶνας ὑπὲρ αὐτῆς ἠγωνίσθαι καὶ ἐν κινδύνοις πολλοῖς τε καὶ μεγάλοις ἕνεκα τῆς θεοσεβείας γεγονέναι;
 ἀλλ’ οὐκ ἔστιν·
 ᾧ γε ἀφορμὴ τοῦ πιστεῦσαι γέγονεν ὁ σατανᾶς, φοιτήσας εἰς αὐτὸν καὶ οἰκήσας ἐν αὐτῷ χρόνον ἱκανόν·
 ὃς βοηθούμενος ὑπὸ τῶν ἐπορκιστῶν νόσω περιπεσὼν χαλεπῇ καὶ ἀποθανεῖσθαι ὅσον οὐδέπω νομιζόμενος, ἐν αὐτῇ τῇ κλίνῃ, οὗ ἔκειτο, περιχυθεὶς ἔλαβεν, εἴ γε χρὴ λέγειν τὸν τοιοῦτον εἰληφέναι.
 οὐ μὴν οὐδὲ τῶν λοιπῶν ἔτυχεν, διαφυγὼν τὴν νόσον, ὧν χρὴ μεταλαμβάνειν κατὰ τὸν ἐκκλησίας κανόνα, τοῦ τε σφραγισθῆναι ὑπὸ τοῦ ἐπισκόπου·
 τούτων δὲ μὴ τυχών, πῶς ἂν ἁγίου πνεύματος ἔτυχεν;’
’ Καὶ πάλιν μετὰ βραχέα φησίν·
 “ ὁ διὰ δειλίαν καὶ φιλοζωΐαν ἐν τῷ καιρῷ τῆς διώξεως πρεσβύτερον εἶναι ἑαυτὸν ἀρνησάμενος.
 ἀξιούμενος καὶ παρακαλούμενος μένος ὑπὸ τῶν διακόνων, ἵν’ τοῦ οἰκίσκου, ἐν ᾧ καθεῖρξεν ἑαυτόν, τοῖς ἀδελφοῖς ὅσα θέμις καὶ δάα δυνατὸν πρεσβυτέρῳ προκινδυνεύουσιν ἀδελφοῖς καὶ ἐπικουρίας δεομένοις βοηθεῖν, τοσοῦτον ἀπέσχεν τοῦ παρακαλοῦσι τοῖς διακόνοις, ὡς καὶ χαλεπαίνοντα necessaryinthe Church, that numberwhoby God's providence were rich and multiplying, nor an immense and countless laity, turn him from sucha desperate failure and recall him to the Church.
” Αnd again, further on, he adds to these remarks as follows:
“ But come, let us nextsayin what deeds οrin what kindofconducthe placed his confidence so as to aspiretothe episcopate.
 Was it because from the beginning he had beenbroughtupin the Church, and had fought many conflictson her behalf, and had been through the midstof dangers,many and great, for the sake of religiojn? Νot so.
 The occasion of his acceptance of the faithwas Satan, who resorted to him and dwelt in him fora long time.
 While he was being healed by the exorcists he fell intoa grievous sickness, and, as hewas considered tobe allbut dead, received baptism by affusion on the very bed in which he lay, if indeed one may say that such a man has received it.
 Νor yet indeed did he obtain the other things, when he recovered from his sickness, of which one should partake according to the rule of the Church, or the sealing by the bishop.
 Αnd as he did not obtain these, how could he obtain the Ηoly spirit?’’ Αnd shortly afterwardshe says again:
 “.
.
.
 he who through cowardice and love of life at the time of persecution denied that he was a presbyter.
 For when he was requested and exhorted by the deacons to leave the cell in which he shut himself, and bring all the help to the brethren that it is right and possible for a presbyter to being to brethren who are in danger and in need of succour, so far was he from obeying the deacons' exhortations, that he even went ἀπιέναι καὶ ἀπαλλάττεσθαι·
 μὴ γὰρ ἔτι βούλεσθαι πρεσβύτερος εἶναι ἔφη, ἑτέρας γὰρ εἶναι φιλοσοφίας ἐραστής. ’
 ’ Yπερβὰςδ’ ὀλίγα, τούτοις πάλιν ἐπιφέρει λέγων·
 καταλιπὼν γὰρ ὁ λαμπρὸς οὗτος τὴν ἐκκλησίαν τοῦ θεοῦ, ἐν ᾖ πιστεύσας κατηξιώθη τοῦ πρεσβυτερίου κατὰ χάριν τοῦ ἐπισκόπου τοῦ ἐπιθέντος αὐτῷ χεῖρα εἰς πρεσβυτερίου κλῆρον, ὃς διακωλυόμενος ὑπὸ παντὸς τοῦ κλήρου, ἀλλὰ καὶ λαιῶν πολλῶν, ἐπεὶ μὴ ἐξὸν ἦν τὸν ἐν κλίνῃ διὰ νόσον περιχυθέντα, ὥσπερ καὶ οὗτος, εἰς κλῆρόν τινα γενέσθαι, ἠξίωσεν συγχωρηθῆναι αὐτῷ τοῦτον μόνον χειροτονῆσαι.
” Εἶτ’ ἄλλο τι τούτοις χείριστον προστίθησιν τῶν τοῦ ἀνδρὸς ἀτοπημάτων, λέγων·
 οὕτως “ ποιήσας γὰρ τὰς προσφορὰς καὶ διανέμων ἑκάστῳ τὸ μέρος καὶ ἐπιδιδοὺς τοῦτο, ὀμνύειν ἀντὶ τοῦ εὐλογεῖν τοὺς ταλαιπώρους ἀνθρώπους ἀναγκάζει, κατέχων ἀμφοτέραις ταῖς χερσὶ τὰς τοῦ λαβόντος καὶ μὴ ἀφιείς, ἕατ’ ἂν ὀμνύοντες εἴπωσιν ταῦτα( τοῖς γὰρ ἐκείνου χρήσομαι λόγοις)·
 ἴ’ ὄμοσόν μοι κατὰ τοῦ αἵματος καὶ τοῦ σώματος τοῦ κυρίου ἡμῶν Ἰησοῦ χριστοῦ μηδέποτέ με καταλιπεῖν καὶ ἐπιστρέψαι πρὸς Κορνήλιον.’
 καὶ ὁ ἄθλιος ἄνθρωπος οὐ πρότερον γεύεται, εἰ μὴ πρότερον αὑτῷ καταρίσαιτο, καὶ ἀντὶ τοῦ εἰπεῖν λαμβάνοντα τὸν ἄρτον ἐκεῖνον τὸ ἀμήν, οὐκ ἐπανήξω πρὸς Κορνήλιον’ λέγει. ’
 ’ Καὶ μεθ’ ἕτερα πάλιν ταῦτά φησιν·
“ ἤδη δὲ ἴσθι γεγυμνῶσθαι καὶ ἔρημον γεγονέναι, αὐτὸν καθ’ ἡμέραν ἑκάστην τῶν ἀδελφῶν καὶ εἰς τὴν ἐκκλησίαν ἐπανερχομένων·
 ὅν away and departed in anger.
 For he said that henolonger wished to bea presbyter, since he was enamoured of a different philosophy.
” Passing overa few things, he again adds as follows :
“ For when thisillustrious person desertedtheChurch of God,in which, when he came to believe, he was deemed worthy of the presbyterate through the favour of the bishop, who laid his hand on him to confer that order( meeting the oppositionofall the clergyandmany lay personsas well— since one has received baptism by affusion1 on his bed owing to sickness, as Νovatus had, might not be ordainedto an order— with the request thathe should be to ordain this man alone).
.
.
.
” Then headds something else,the worst of all the man's offences, saying thus:
“ For whenhehas the offerings, and is distributing to each his portion, 2 as he gives it into their handshe compels the wretched persons to utter an oath instead of the blessing, taking in both his hands those of himwhohad received,and not lettinggo until they swear saying thus( forI shall use his very words):
‘ Swear tome by the Bloodand Body ofourLord Jesus Christ never to forsake me and turnto Cornelius.’
 the miserable person does not taste until he first calls down a curse upon himself, and instead οf saying the Αmen as hereceives that bread, he says, ‘I will not return to Cornelius.’
 Αnd after οtherremarks he again says as follows:
 ‘‘ But know that now he has become bare and desolate, for every day the brethren desert him andgo back Μωσῆς, ὁ μακάριος μάρτυς, ὁ παρ’ ἡμῖν ἔναγχος μαρτυρήσας καλήν τινα καὶ θαυμαστὴν μαρτυρίαν, ἔτι ὢν ἐν κόσμῳ, κατιδὼν αὐτοῦ τὴν θρασύτητα καὶ τὴν ἀπόνοιαν, ἀκοινώνητον ἐποίησεν σὺν τοῖς πέντε πρεσβυτέροις τοῖς ἅμα αὐτῷ ἀποσχίσασιν ἑαυτοὺς τῆς ἐκκλησίας.
” Καὶ ἐπὶ τέλει δὲ τῆς ἐπιστολῆς τῶν ἐπὶ τῆς Ῥώμης παραγενομένων ἐπισκόπων τῆς τε τοῦ Νοουάτου κατεγνωκότων ἀβελτηρίας κατάλογον πεποίηται, ὁμοῦ τά τε ὀνόματα καὶ ἧς ὁ καθεῖς αὐτῶν προηγεῖτο παροικίας, ἐπισημαινόμενος, τῶν τε μὴ παραγενομένων μὲν ἐπὶ τῆς Ῥώμης, συνευδοκησάτντων δὲ διὰ γραμμάτων τῆ τῶν προειρημένων ψήφῳ τὰς προσηγορίας ὁμοῦ καὶ τὰς πόλεις, ὅθεν ἕκαστος ὁρμώμενος ἐπέστελλεν, μνημονεύει.
 ταῦτα μὲν ὁ Κορνήλιος Φαβίῳ Ἀντιοχείας ἐπισκόπῳ δηλῶν ἔγραφεν.
 XLIV.
 Τῷ δ’ αὐτῷ τούτῳ Φαβίῳ, ὑποκατακλινομένῳ πως τῷ σχίσματι, καὶ Διονύσιος ὁ κατ’ Ἀλεξάνδρειαν ἐπιστείλας πολλά τε καὶ ἄλλα περὶ μετανοίας ἐν τοῖς πρὸς αὐτὸν γράμμασιν διελθὼν τῶν τε κατ’ Ἀλεξάνδρειαν ἔναγχος τότε μαρτυρησάντων τοὺς ἀγῶνας διιών, μετὰ τῆς ἄλλης ἱστορίας πρᾶγμά τι μεστὸν θαύματος διηγεῖται, ὃ καὶ αὐτὸ ἀναγκαῖον τῇδε παραδοῦναι τῆ γραφῇ, οὕτως ἔχον·
“ ἓν δέ ἀοῖ τοῦτο παράδειγμα παρ’ ἡμῖν συμβεβηκὸς ἐκθήσομαι.
 Σεραπίων τις ἢν παρ’ ἡμῖν, πιστὸς γέρων, ἀμέμπτως μὲν τὸν πολὺν διαβιώσας χρόνον, ἐν δὲ τῷ πειρασμῷ πεσών.
 οὗτος πολλάκις ἐδεῖτο, καὶ οὐδεὶς προσεῖχεν αὐτῷ·
 καὶ γὰρ ἐτεθύκει.
 ἐν νόσῳ δὲ γενόμενος, τριῶν ἑξῆς ἡμερῶν ἄφωνος καὶ ἀναίσθητος to the Church.
 Αnd Moses, that blessed martyrwho just now borea goodly and marvelloustestimony amongst us, while hewas still in the world, perceiving his insane arrogance, broke off communion with him and with the five presbyters who, along with him, had separated themselves from the Church.
” Αnd at the close οf the letter he has madea catalogue οf the bishops present at Rome who condemned the stupidity of Νοvatus, indicating at once both their names and the name of the community over which each one presided;
 and of those who were not present, indeed, at Rome, but who signified in writing their assent to the judgementof the aforesaid, he mentionsthe names and, as well, the city where each lived and from which each wrote.
 This is what Cornelius wrote for the informationof Fabius, bishop of Antioch.
 XLIV.
 But to this same Fabius, when hewas inclining somewhat towards the schism, Dionysius also, he of Alexandria, wrote, making many οther reamarks with reference to repentance in his letter to him and describing the conflicts of those lately martyred at Alexandria.
 In the course of his narrativehe tellsacertain astonishing tale, which must needs be handed down in this work.
 It is as follows:
 ‘‘ But this one example that happened amongst usI shall set forth for thee.
 There was a certain Serapion amongst us, an old mananda believer,who lived blamelessly fora long time, but in the trial fell.
 This man oftentimes besought absolution, and no one paid him heed.
 For indeed he had sacrificed.
 Αnd, falling sick, he continued for three successive days speechless and unconscious;
 but on the fourth διετέλεσεν, βραχὺ δὲ ἀνασφήλας τῇ τετάρτῃ προσεκαλέσατο τὸν θυγατριδοῦν, καὶἴ’ μέχρι με τίνος’ φησίνὧ τέκνον, κατέχετε;
 δέομαι, σπεύσατε, καὶ με θᾶττον ἀπολύσατε, τῶν πρεσβυτέρων μοί τινα κάλεσον.’
 καὶ ταῦτα εἰπών, πάλιν ἢν ἄφωνος.
 ἔδραμεν ὁ παῖς ἐπὶ τὸν πρεσβύτερον·
 νὺξ δὲ ἢν, κἀκεῖνος ἠσθένει.
 ἀφικέσθαι μὲν οὐκ ἐδυνήθη, ἐντολῆς δὲ ὑπ’ ἐμοῦ δεδομένης τοὺς ἀπαλλαττομένους τοῦ βίου, εἰ δέοιντο, καὶ μάλιστα εἰ καὶ πρότερον ἱκετεύσαντες τύχοιεν, ἀφίεσθαι, ἵν’ εὐέλπιδες ἀπαλλάττωνται, βραχὺ τῆς εὐχαριστίας ἔδωκεν τῷ παιδαρίῳ, ἀποβρέξαι κελεύσας καὶ τῷ πρεσβύτῃ κατὰ τοῦ στόματος ἐπιστάξαι.
 ἐπανῆκεν ὁ παῖς φέρων, ἐγγύς τε γενομένου, πρὶν εἰσελθεῖν, ἀνενέγκας πάλιν ὁ Σεραπίωνἴ’ ‘ ἧκες’ ἔφη ‘ τέκνον;
 καὶ ὁ μὲν πρεσβύτερος ἐλθεῖν οὐκ ἠδυνήθη, σὺ δὲ ποίησον ταχέως τὸ προσταχθὲν καὶ ἀπάλλαττέ με.
 ἀπέβρεξεν ὁ παῖς καὶ ἅμα τε ἐνέχεεν τῷ στόματι καὶ μικρὸν ἐκεῖνος καταβροχθίσας εὐθέως ἀπέδωκεν τὸ πνεῦμα.
 ἆρ’ οὐκ ἐναργῶς διετηρήθη καὶ παρέμεινεν, ἕως λυθῇ καὶ τῆς ἁμαρτίας ἐξαλειφθείσης ἐπὶ πολλοῖς οἷς ἔπραξεν καλοῖς ὁμολογηθῆναι δυνηθῇ; ’
’ XLV.
 Ταῦτα ὁ Διονύσιος.
 ἴδωμεν δ’ ὁ αὐτὸς ὁποῖα καὶ τῷ Νοουάτῳ διεχάραξεν, ταράττοντι τηνικάδε τὴν Ῥωμαίων ἀδελφότητα·
 ἐπειδὴ οὗν τῆς ἀποστασίας καὶ τοῦ σχίσματος πρόφασιν ἐποιεῖτο τῶν ἀδελφῶν τινας, ὡς δὴ πρὸς αὐτῶν ἐπὶ τοῦτ’ ἐλθεῖν ἐκβεβιασμένος, ὅρα τίνα τρόπον αὐτῷ γράφει·
 “ Διονύσιος Νοουατιανῷ ἀδελφῷ he rallieda little,and calling his grandson to him, he said:
‘ Ηow long, my child, do ye hold me back? Ηaste ye,I pray, and grant mea speedy release;
 do thou summon me one or the presbyters.’
 having Said this he again became speechless.
 The boy ran for the presbyter.
 But it was night, and he was unwell and eould not come.
 Yet sicneI had givenanorder that thosewho Were departing this life, if theybesought it, and espeeially if they had made supplication before, should be absolved, that theymightdepart in hope,he gave the little boya small portionofthe eucharist, bidding him soak it and let it fall in drops down mto the old man’s Back cametheboV with it, and whenheWaS near, before he entered, serapion revivedagain and said,‘ Hast thou eome, child?The presbyter could not come, but dothou quiekly Whathe bade thee, and let me depart.’
 The boy soakedit1 and atthetime poured itintohis mouth, and When he had swalloweda little he straightWay gaVe gave the ghost.
 WaS it not plain that he was preserved and remained untilhe obtained release, that, with hissin blotted out,he might be acknowledged for all the good deeds he had done?’’ XLV.
 Such is the aeeount of Dionysius.
 But let us see the kind of lerter that the same person wrote alsoto Novatus, 2 who was then disturbing the Roman brotherhood.
 Since, then, he put forward some of the brethren as an excuse for his defection and sehism, as having been eompelled by them to proeeed to this length, see how Dionysius writes to him:
 “ Dionysius χαίρειν.
 εἰ ἄκων, ὡς φῄς, ἤχθης, δείξεις ἀναχωρήσας ἑκών.
 ἔδει μὲν γὰρ καὶ πᾶν ὅτι οὖν παθεῖν ὑπὲρ τοῦ μὴ διακόφαι τὴν ἐκκληαίαν τοῦ θεοῦ, καὶ ἢν οὐκ ἀδοξοτέρα τῆς ἕνεκεν τοῦ μὴ εἰδωλολατρἠααι γινομένης ἡ ἕνεκεν τοῦ μὴ οχίααι μαρτυρία, κατ’ ἐμὲ δὲ καὶ μείζων.
 ἐκεῖ μὲν γὰρ ὑπὲρ μιᾶς τις τῆς ἑαυτοῦ φυχῆς, ἐνταῦθα δὲ ὑπὲρ ὅλης τῆς ἐκκλησίας μαρτυρεῖ.
 καὶ νῦν δὲ εἰ πείσαις ἢ βιάσαιο τοὺς ἀδελφοὺς εἰς ὁμόνοιαν ἐλθεῖν, μεῖζον ἔσται ἀοῖ τοῦ σφάλματος τὸ κατκαὶ τὸ μὲν οὐ λογιαθήσεται, τὸ δὲ ἐπαινεθήσεται.
 εἰ δὲ ἀπειθούντων ἀδυνατοίης, σῴζων Gen.
 19, 17 αῷεε τὴν σεαυτοῦ φυχήν.
 ἐρρῶαθαί σε, ἐχόμενον τῆς εἰρήνης ἐν κυρίῳ, εὔχομαι.
 XLVI.
 Tαῦτα καὶ πρὸς τὸν Νοουάτον·
 γράφει δὲ καὶ τοῖς κατ’ Αἴγυπτον ἐπιστολὴν περὶ μετανοίας ἐν ἦ τὰ δόξαντα αὐτῷ περὶ τῶν ὑποπεπτωκότων παρατέθειται, τάξεις παραπτωμάτων διαγράψας.
 καὶ πρὸς Κόλωνα( τῆς Ἑρμουπολιτῶν δὲ παροικίας ἐπίακοπος ἦν οὗτος〉 ἰδία τις περὶ μετανοίας αὐτοῦ φέρεται γραφὴ καὶ ἄλλη ἐπιατρεπτικὴ πρὸς τὸ κατ’ Ἀλεξάνδρειαν αὐτοῦ ποίμνιον.
 ἐν τούτοις ἐατὶν καὶ ἡ περὶ μαρτυρίου πρὸς τὸν Ὠριγένην γραφεῖσα·
 καὶ τοῖς κατὰ Λαοδίκειαν ἀδελφοῖς, ὧν προΐστατο Θηλυμίδρης ἐπίσκοπος, καὶ τοῖς κατὰ Ἀρμενίαν ὡσαύτως περὶ μετανοίας ἐπιατέλλει, ὧν ἐπεσκόπευεν Μερουζάνη.
 πρὸς ἅπασι τούτοις καὶ Κορνηλίῳ τῷ κατὰ ῾Ρώμην γράφει, δεξάμενος αὐτοῦ τὴν κατὰ τοῦ Νοουάτου ἐπιστολήν, ᾧ καὶ αημαίνει δηλῶν ἑαυτὸν παρακεκλῆσθαι ὑπό τε Ἑλένου τοῦ ἐν Tαραῷ τῆς Κιλικίας ἐπισκόπου καὶ τῶν λοιπῶν τῶν σὺν αὐτῶ to Novatianus1a brother, greeting.
 If thou wastled οn unwillingly,as thou sayest, thou wilt prove it by retiring willingly.
 For a man ought to suffer anythingand everything rather than divide the Churchof Good, and it were not less glorious to incur martyrdom to avoid schism thanto avoid idolatry, nay, in my opinion it were more so.
 For in the οne casea man isa martyr for the sake of hisown single soul, but in the other for the sake οf the whole Church.
 And if thou wert even now to persuade or compel the brethren to cometoone mind, thy recovery will be greater than.
 thy fall, and the one will notbe reckoned, while the οther will be praised.
 But if they obey thee not, and thou hast no power, by all means save thineown soul.
I pray that thou mayest fare well and cleave to peace in the Lord.
” XLVI.
 This aho he wrote to Novatus.
 Αnd he wrote also to the Egyptians a letter on Repentanee, in which he has set forth his opinions with reference to those whohad fallen,outlining degrees of failures.
 Αnd to Colon( he was bishopof the community οf the Hermopolitans)a personal letter of his is extant On Repentance, and another in the nature of a rebuketo his flock at Alexandria.
 Αmong these there is also the brethren at Laofficea over whom Thelymidres resided as bishop;
 and he wrote to those in rmenia, likewise On Repentanee, whose bishopwas eruzanes.
 In addition toall these he wrote also Corneliusof Rome, when he received his letter against Novatus, in which abo he clearly infficates that he had been invitedby Helenus, bishop at Tarsus Φιρμιλιανοῦ τε τοῦ ἐν Καππαδοκίᾳ καὶ τοῦ κατὰ Παλαιστίνην Θεοκτίστου, ὡς ἂν ἐπὶ τὴν σύνοδον ἀπαντήσοι τὴν κατὰ ᾿Αντιόχειαν, ἔνθα τοῦ κρατύνειν τινὲς ἐνεχείρουν τὸ σχίσμα.
 πρὸς τούτοις ἐπιστέλλει μηνυθῆναι αὐτῷ Φάβιον μὲν κεκοιμῆσθαι, Δημητριανὸν δὲ διάδοχον ἐκείνου τῆς κατ’ Ἀντιόχειαν ἐπισκοπῆς καθεστάναι·
 γράφει δὲ καὶ περὶ τοῦ ἐν Ἱεροσολύμοις αὐτοῖς ῥήμασιν φάσκων·
 “ ὁ μὲν γὰρ θαυμάσιος Ἀλέξανδρος ἐν φρουρᾷ γενόμενος, μακαρίως ἀνεπαύσατο.
 ” Ἑξῆς ταύτῃ καὶ ἑτέρα τις ἐπιστοΛὴ τοῖς ἐν‘ Ρώμῃ τοῦ Διονυσίου φέρεται διακονικὴ διὰ Ἱππολύτου·
 τοῖς αὐτοῖς δὲ ἄλλην περὶ εἰρήνης διατυποῦται, καὶ ὡσαύτως περὶ μετανοίας, καὶ αὗ πάλιν ὤην τοῖς ἐκεῖσε ὁμολογηταῖς, ἔτι τῇ τοῦ Νοουάτου συμφερομένοις γνώμῃ·
 τοῖς δὲ αὐτοῖς τούτοις ἑτέρας δύο, μεταθεμένοις ἐπὶ τὴν ἐκκλησίαν, ἐπιστέλλει.
 καὶ ἄλλοις δὲ πλείοσιν ὁμοίως διὰ γραμμάτων ὁμιλήσας, ποικίλας τοῖς ἔτι νῦν σπουδὴν περὶ τοὺς λόγους αὐτοῦ ποιουμένοις καταλέλοιπεν ὠφελείας.
 namely Firmilian in Cappadocia and Theoctlstus in Palestine, to attend thesynod at Antioch, where certain were attempting to strengthen the schism of Novatus.
 Moreover he writes that he had received information that Fabius had fallen asleep, and that Demetrianwas appointed his suceessor in the episcopate of Antioch.
 And he Writes also vith referenee to thebishopof Jerusalem, saying in these very words:
“ For Alexander, that wonderfulman, being put in prison, happily entered into his rest.
” Next to this thereis also another extant,a“ diaconic’’1 letter of DionySius to thosein Rome through Hippolytus.
 To the same peOple he composed another letter On Peace, and likewiseΟn Repentanee, and again another to the confessors there While they were still in agreement with the opinion of Novatus.
 Αnd to these same persons he wrote two more, after theyhad returned to the Chureh.
 Αnd in his communications with many others, likewise by letter, he has left behind a varied Souree of profit to those who still to this day set store by his writings.
 Ζݲ Τάδε καὶ ἢ ἑβδόμη περιέχει βίβλος τῆς Ἐκκλνοσιαστικῆς ἱστορίας Αݲ Περὶ τῆς Δεκίου καὶ Γάλλου κακοτροπίας.
 Bݲ Οἱ κατὰ τούσδε‘ Ρωμαίων ἐπίσκοποι.
 Γݲ Ὅπως Κυπριανὸς ἅμα τοῖς κατ’ αὐτὸν ἐπισκόποις τοὺς ἐξ αἱρετικῆς πλάνης ἐπιστρέφοντας λουτρῷ δεῖν καθαίρειν πρῶτος ἐδογμάτισεν.
 Δݲ Ὁπόσας περὶ τούτου Διονύσιος συνέταξεν ἐπιστολάς.
 Εݲ Περὶ τῆς μετὰ τὸν διωγμὸν εἰρήνης.
 ϛݲ Περὶ τῆς κατὰ Σαβέλλιον αἱρέσεως.
 Ζݲ Περὶ τῆς τῶν αἱρετικῶν παμμιάρου πλάνης καὶ τῆς θεοπόμπου ὁράσεως Διονυσίου οὗ τε παρείληφεν ἐκκλησιαστικοῦ κανόνος.
 Ηݲ Περὶ τῆς κατὰ Νοουάτον ἑτεροδοξίας.
 Θݲ Περὶ τοῦ τῶν αἱρετικῶν ἀθέου βαπτίσματος.
 Ιݲ Περὶ Οὐαλεριανοῦ καὶ τοῦ κατ’ αὐτὸν διωγμοῦ.
 ΙݲΑݲ Περὶ τῶν τότε Διονυσίῳ καὶ τοῖς κατ’ Αἴγυπτον συμβάντων.
 CONTENTS ΟF BOOK VII The Seventh Book of the Ecclesiastical History contains the follorving:
 Ι.
 Οn the evil disposition of Deeius and Gallus.
 ΙΙ.
 The bishops of Rome in their day.
 III.
 How Cyprian, along with the bishopson hls side, Was the rirst to hold the opinion that thosewhowere turning from heretical error ought to be cleansed by baptism.
 ΙV.
 How many letterS DionySius composed on this subject.
 V.
 Οn the peace after the persecution.
 VI.
 Οn the heresy of Sabellius.
 VII.
 Οn the abominable error of the heretics and the God- sent visionof Dionysius, and the rule of the Church which he had reeeiVed.
 VIII.
 Οn the heterodoxyof Novatus.
 IX.
 Οn the ungodly baptism of the hereties.
 X.
 On Valerian and the persecution in his day.
 XI.
 On the things that then happened to DiOnySiuS and those in Egypt.
 ΙݲΒݲ Περὶ τῶν ἐν Καισαρείᾳ τῆς μαρτυρησάντων.
 ΙݲΓݲ Περὶ τῆς κατὰ Γαλλιῆνον εἰρήνης.
 ΙݲΔݲ Οἱ κατ’ ἐκεῖνο συνηκμακότες ἐπίσκοποι.
 ΙݲΕݲ Ὅπως κατὰ Καισάρειαν ἐμαρτυρησεν.
 Ιݲϛݲ Ἡ κατὰ Ἀστύριον ἰατορίᾳ.
 ΙݲΖݲ Περὶ τῶν κατὰ Πανεάδα σημείων τῆς τοῦ σωτῆρος ἡμῶν μεγαλουργίας.
 ΙݲΗݲ Περὶ τοῦ θρόνου Ἰακώβου.
 ΙݲΘݲ Περὶ τῶν ἑορταστικῶν Διονυσίου ἔνθα καὶ περὶ τοῦ πάσχα κανονίζει.
 Kݲ Περὶ τῶν ἐν Ἀλεξανδρείᾳ συμβάντων.
 ΚݲΑݲ Περὶ τῆς ἐπισκηψάσης νόσου.
 KݲBݲ Περὶ τῆς Γαλλιήνου βασιλείας.
 ΚݲΓݲ Περὶ Νέπωτος καὶ τοῦ κατ’ αὐτὸνσχίσματος.
 ΚݲΔݲ Περὶ τῆς Ἰωάννου ἀποκαλύψεως.
 ΚݲΕݲ Περὶ τῶν ἐπιστολῶν Διονυσίου.
 Κݲςݲ Περὶ Παύλου τοῦ Σαμοσατέως καὶ τῆς Ἀντιοχείᾳ συστάσης ὑπ’ αὐτοῦ αἱρέσεως.
 ΚݲΖݲ Περὶ τῶν τότε γνωριζομένων ἐπισκόπων.
 ΚݲΗݲ Ὅπως ὁ Παῦλος ἀπελεγχθεὶς ἐξεκηρύθη.
 ΚݲΘݲ Περὶ τῆς τῶν Μανιχαίων ἑτεροδόξου ἄρτι τότε ἀρξαμένης.
 Λݲ Περὶ τῶν καθ’ ἡμᾶς αὐτοὺς ἐκκλησιαστικῶν ἀνδρῶν τίνες τε αὐτῶ μέχρι τῆς τῶν ἐκκλησιῶν πολιορκίας διέμειναν.
 XII.
 On those who were martyred at Caesarea in Palestine.
 XIII.
 On the peaee under Gallienus.
 XIV.
 The bishops who flourished at that time.
 XV.
 Ηow Marinus was martyred at Caesarea.
 XVI.
 The story of Astyrius.
 XVII.
 On the signs at Paneasofthe mighty workingof our saviour.
 XVIII.
 Οn the throne of James.
 XIX.
 On the festal letterSof DionySiuS, where also he draws upa eanon conerningthe Pascha.
 XX.
 On the happeningS at Alexandria.
 XXI.
 Οn the disease that visited it.
 XXII.
 Οn the reign of Gallienus.
 XXIII.
 Οn Nepos andhis schism.
 XXIV.
 On the Apocalypseof John.
 XXV.
 Οn the letters of Dionysius.
 XXVI.
 On Paul of samoSata and the heresy put together by him at Antioch.
 XXVII.
 On the illustriousbishopswho were well known at that time.
 Ηow Ρaul was refuted and excommunh cated.
 on the perverse heterodoxyof the Manicheans, which began precisely at time.
 XXX.
 On the distinguishedchurchmen of our own day, and which of them remained until the attaek upon the churches.
 1 Τὸν ἕβδομον τῆς ἐκκλησιαστικῆς ἱστορίας ὁ μέγας ἡμῖν Ἀλεξανδρέων ἐπίακοπος Διονύσιος ἰδίαις φωναῖς συνεκπονήσει, τῶν καθ’ πεπραγμένων ἕκαστα ἐν μέρει δι’ ὧν καταλέλοιπεν ἐπιστολῶν ὑφηγούμενος·
 ἐμοὶ δ’ ὁ λόγος ἐντεῦθεν ποιήσεται τὴν ἀρχήν.
 Ι.
 Δέκιον οὐδ’ ὅλον ἐπικρατήσαντα δυεῖν ἐτοῖν χρόνον αὐτίκα τε ἅμα τοῖς παισὶν κατασφαγέντα Γάλλος διαδέχεται·
 Ὠριγένης ἐν τούτῳ ἑνὸς δέοντα τῆς ζωῆς ἑβδομήκοντα ἀποπλήσας ἔτη, τελευτᾷ.
 γράφων γέ τοι ὁ Διονύσιος Ἑρμάμμωνι, περὶ τοῦ Γάλλου ταῦτα φάσκει·
“ ἀλλ’ οὐδὲ ἔγνω τὸ Δεκίου κακὸν οὐδὲ προεσκόπησεν τί ποτ’ ἐκεῖνον ἔσφηλεν, ἀλλὰ πρὸς τὸν αὐτὸν πρὸ τῶν ὀφθαλμῶν αὐτοῦ γενόμενον ἔπταισε λίθον·
 ὃς φερομένης αὐτῷ τῆς βασιλείας καὶ κατὰ νοῦν χωρούντων τῶν πραγμάτων, τοὺς ἱεροὺς ἄνδρας, τοὺς περὶ τῆς εἰρήνης αὐτοῦ καὶ τῆς ὑγιείας πρεσβεύοντας πρὸς τὸν θεόν, ἤλασεν.
 οὐκοῦν ἐκείνοις ἐδίωξεν καὶ τὰς ὑπὲρ αὐτοῦ προσευχάς.
 II.
 Ταῦτα μὲν οὗν περὶ τοῦδε·
 κατὰ δὲ τὴν Ῥωμαίων πόλιν Κορνηλίου ἔτεσιν ἀμφὶ τὰ τρία BOOK VII In the composition of the seventh book of Ecclesiastical History Dionysius, the great bishop of the Alexandrians, 1 will again assist us in our task by his own words, indicating in turn eaeh of the things that were donein his day,by means of the letters he has lert behind.
 From that point of time my record will take its beginning.
 Ι.
 when Deeius had reigned for an entire period of less thantwo years,he was forthwith murdered along with his sons, and Gallus sueeeeded him.
 2 Αt this time 3 Origen died, having completedthe year save one of his life.
 Νow when writing to Hermammon, Dionysius speaksas follows,with reference to Gallus:
“ But not evendid Gallus recognize the fault in the policyof Decius,nor yet ffid he look to that whichcausedhis fall, but he stumbled against the same stone that was before his eyes.
 For when his reign was prospering, and matters were moing accorffing to his mind, he drove away the holy men who were supplicating God for his peaee and health.
 Therefore along with them he banished- ho their prayers on his behalf.
” ΙΙ.
 so much, then, concerning him.
 But in the city ofthe Romans, when Cornelius brought his τὴν ἐπιακοπὴν διανύσαντος, Λούκιος διάδοχος, μηαὶνδ’ οὐδ’ ὅλοις οὗτος ὀκτὼ τῇ λειτουργίᾳ διακονησάμενος, Στεφάνῳ τελευτῶν μεταδίδωσι τὸν κλῆρον.
 τούτῳ τὴν πρώτην ὁ Διονύσιος τῶν περὶ βαπτίσματος ἐπιστολῶν ζητήματος οὐ αμικροῦ τηνικάδε ἀνακινηθέντος, εἰ δέοι τοὺς ἐξ οἵας δ’ οὖν ἐπιστρέφοντας διὰ λουτροῦ καθαίρειν.
 παλαιοῦ γέ τοι κεκρατηκότος ἔθους ἐπὶ τῶν τοιούτων μόνῃ χρῆσθαι τῆ διὰ χειρῶν ἐπιθέσεως εὐχῇ, III.
 πρῶτος τῶν τότε Κυπριακός, τῆς κατὰ Καρχηδόνα παροικίας ποιμήν, οὐδ’ ἄλλως ἢ διὰ λουτροῦ πρότερον τῆς πλάνης ἀποκαθηραμένους προσίεσθαι δεῖν ἡγεῖτο.
 ἀλλ’ ὅ γε Στέφανος μὴ δεῖν τι νεώτερον παρὰ τὴν κρατήσασαν ἐπικαινοτομεῖν οἰόμενος, ἐπὶ τούτῳ διηγανάκτει·
 IV.
 πλεῖστα δὴ οὖν αὐτῷ περὶ τούτου διὰ γραμμάτων ὁ Διονύσιος ὁμιλήσας, τελευτῶν δηλοῖ ὡς ἄρα τοῦ διωγμοῦ λελωφηκότος αἱ πανταχόσε ἐκκλησίαι τὴν κατὰ Νοουάτον ἀποστραφεῖσαι νεωτεροποιίαν, εἰρήνην πρὸς ἑαυτὰς ἀνειλήφεσαν·
 γράφει δὲ ὧδε·
 V.
 “ ἴσθι δὲ νῦν, ἀδελφέ, ὅτι ἥνωνται πᾶσαι αἱ πρότερον διεσχισμέναι κατά τὴν ἀνατολὴν ἐκκλησίαι καὶ ἔτι προσωτέρω, πάντες εἰαὶν ὁμόφρονες οἱ πανταχοῦ προεστῶτες, χαίροντες καθ’ ὑπερβολὴν ἐπὶ τῆ παρὰ προσδοκίαν εἰρήνη γενομένῃ, Δημητριανὸς ἐν Ἀντιοχείᾳ, Θεόκτιστος ἐν Καισαρείᾳ, Μαζαβάνης ἐν Μαρῖνος ἐν Τύρῳ κοιμηθέντος Ἀλεξάνδρου, ῾Ηλιόδωρος ἐν Λαοδικείᾳ ἀναπαυσαμένου Θηλυμίδρου, Ἕλενος ἐν Ταρσῷ καὶ πᾶσαι αἱ τῆς ἐκκλησίαι, Φιρμιλιανὸς καὶ πᾶσα episeopate to an end after about three years, Lucius was appointed his suecessor;
 but he exercised his ministry for less than eight entire months, and dying transmitted ffihls offiee to stephen.
 To him Dionysiusinffitedthe Rrst ofhisletters On Baptism, no small question harivlng then arisen as to whether it Were neeessary to eleanse by means of baptism those who were turning from any heresy whatsoever.
Α euStom, which was atany rate old, having prevailed in such casesto use only prayer with the laying οn of hands, III.
 Cyprian, pastor of the community at Carthage, was the Rrst of thoSe of his day to consider that they οught not to be admitted otherwise than by having been first eleansed from their error by baptism.
 But stephen, thinking that they ought not to make any innovation contrary to the traffition that had prevailed from the beginning, was full of indignation thereat.
 Iv.
 Dionysius, therefore, haring communi- cated with him on this point at very great lengthina letter, at its closeshows that withthe abatement οf the persecutionthe churches everywhere, having now rejected the innovation of Novatus, had resumed peace among themselves.
 Ηe writes thus:
 V.
“ But knownow, brother, that alltheehurches in the Eastandstill further away, which were fonnerly divided, have been united, and all their presidents eveqwhere are of like mind, rejoicing above measure at the unexpeeted arrival of peaee:
 Demetrian at Αntiοch, Theoctistus at Caesarea, Mazabanes at Aelia, marinus at Tyre( Alexander having fallen asleep), Heliodorus at Laodicea( for Thelymidreshasentered into his rest), Helenus at TarSus and all the churches of Cilicia, Firmilian and all Cappadocia.
 τοὺς γὰρ περιφανεστέρους μόνους τῶν ἐπισκόπων ὠνόμασα, ἵνα μήτε μῆκος τῆ ἐπιστολῇ μήτε προσάφω τῷ λόγῳ.
 αἱ μέντοι Συρίαι ὅλαι καὶ ἡ Ἀραβία, οἷς ἐπαρκεῖτε ἑκάστοτε καὶ οἷς νῦν ἐπεστείλατε, ἢ τε Μεσοποταμία Πόντος Βιθυνία καί, συνελόντι εἰπεῖν, ἀγαλλιῶνται πανταχοῦ τῆ ὁμονοίᾳ καὶ φιλαδελφίᾳ, δοξάζοντες’ τον θέον.
 Ταῦτα μὲν ὁ Διονύσιος·
 Στέφανον δ’ ἐπὶ δυσὶν ἀποπλήσαντα τὴν λειτουργίαν ἔτεαιν, Ξύστος διαδέχεται.
 τούτῳ δευτέραν ὁ Διονύσιος περὶ βαπτίαματος χαράξας ἐπιατολήν, ὁμοῦ τὴν Στε- φάνου καὶ τῶν λοιπῶν ἐπισκόπων γνώμην τε καὶ κρίσιν δηλοῖ, περὶ τοῦ Στεφάνου λέγων ταῦτα·
 ἐπεστάλκει μὲν οὖν πρότερον καὶ περὶ Ἑλένου καὶ περὶ Φιρμιλιανοῦ καὶ πάντων τῶν τε ἀπὸ Κιλικίας καὶ Καππαδοκίας καὶ δῆλον ὅτι Γαλατίας καὶ πάντων τῶν ἑξῆς ὁμορούντων ἐθνῶν, ὡς οὐδὲ ἐκείνοις κοινωνήσων διὰ τὴν αὐτὴν ταύτην ἐπειδὴ τοὺς αἱρετικούς, φησίν, καὶ σκόπει τὸ μέγεθος τοῦ πράγματος.
 ὄντως γὰρ δόγματα περὶ τούτου γέγονεν ἐν ταῖς μεγίσταις τῶν ἐπισκόπων συνόδοις, ὡς πυνθάνομαι, ὥστε τοὺς προσιόντας ἀπὸ αἱρέσεων εἶτα ἀπολούεσθαι καὶ ἀνακαθαίρεσθαι τὸν παλαιᾶς καὶ ἀκαθάρτου ζύμης ῥύπον.
 καὶ περὶ τούτων αὐτοῦ πάντων δεόμενος ἐπέστειλα.
 Καὶ μεθ’ ἕτερά φηαιν·
“ καὶ τοῖς ἀγαπητοῖς δὲ ἡμῶν καὶ συμπρεσβυτέροις Διονυσίῳ καὶ συμψήφοις πρότερον Στεφάνῳ γενομένοις καὶ τῶν αὐτῶν μοι γράφουσιν, πρότερον μὲν ὀλίγα, καὶ νῦν δὲ διὰ πλειόνων ἐπέστειλα.
” ForI name onlythemore eminent dishops, to avoid making my letter long and my discourse teffious.
 Νevertheless, the syriasasa whole and Αrabia, which ye constantly help and to which ye have now written, and Mesopotamia and Ρontus and and, in a everywhere all everywhere rejoice exceedingly their concordand brotherly love, giving gloryto God.
” such is the aceount of Dionysius.
 But when stephen had fulRlled his ministry for two years, he was succeeded by Xystus.
 To him Dionysius penneda second letteron Baptism, showing the opinion and decision both of stephen and of the οther bishops.
 About stephen he speaks thus:
 ‘‘ Νow he had written fonnerly with reference both to Ηelenus and Firmilian and all those from Cilicia and Cappadocia and, in fact, Galatia and all the prorinees that border on these, to the eKect that he would not hold communion in future with them either, for this same reason;
 since, says he, they rebaptize heretics.
 Αnd look thou at the importance of the matter.
 For deerees on this question have been actually passed in the largest synods of bishops,as1 learn, so that thosewhocome over from heresiesare nrst placed under instruction, then washedand purged again from the ffith of the old and impure leaven.
 ΑndI wote beseeching him οn all these matters.
” Αnd,after other remarks, he says:
“ Αnd toοurbeloved fellow- presbyters aho,Dionysius and Philemon, who had formerly been of the same opinion as stephen and mote some lettersto me aboutthesame matters, at RrstI wrote briefly, but now at greater length.
” Ἀλλὰ ταῦτα μὲν περὶ τοῦ δηλουμένου ζητήματος·
 VI.
 σημαίνων δὲ ἐν ταὐτῷ καὶ περὶ τῶν κατὰ Σαβέλλιον αἱρετικῶν ὡς κατ’ αὐτὸν ἐπιπολαζόντων, ταῦτά φησιν·
“ περὶ γὰρ τοῦ νῦν κινηθέντος ἐν τῆ Πτολεμαΐδι τῆς Πενταπόλεως δόγματος, ὄντος ἀσεβοῦς καὶ βλασφημίαν πολλὴν ἔχοντος περὶ τοῦ παντοκράτορος θεοῦ πατρὸς τοῦ κυρίου ἡμῶν ᾿Ιησοῦ Χριστοῦ ἀπιστίαν τε περὶ τοῦ μονογενοῦς παιδὸς αὐτοῦ, τοῦ πρωτοτόκου πάαης κτίσεως, τοῦ ἐνανθρωπήσαντος λόγου, ἀναισθησίαν δὲ τοῦ ἁγίου πνεύματος, ἐλθόντων ἑκατέρωθεν ἐμὲ καὶ προγραμμάτων καὶ τῶν διαλεξομένων ἀδελφῶν, ἐπέστειλά τινα, ὡς ἔδυ·
 νήθην, παρασχόντος τοῦ θεοῦ, διδασκαλικώτερον ὑφηγούμενος, ὧν τὰ ἀντίγραφα ἔπεμφά σοι.
” VII.
 καὶ ἐν τῇ τρίτη δὲ τῶν περὶ βαπτίσματος, ἢν Φιλήμονι τῷ κατὰ Ῥώμην πρεσβυτέρῳ ὁ αὐτὸς γράφει Διονύαιος, ταῦτα παρατίθεται·
 “ ἐγὼ δὲ καὶ τοῖς συντάγμασιν καὶ ταῖς παραδόσεσιν αἱρετικῶν ἐνέτυχον, χραίνων μέν μου πρὸς ὀλίγον τὴν ψυχὴν ταῖς παμμιάροις ὄνησιν δ’ οὗν ἀπ’ αὐτῶν ταύτην λαμβάνων, ἐξελέγχειν αὐτοὺς παρ’ ἐμαυτῷ καὶ πολὺ πλέον βδεΛύττεσθαι.
 καὶ δή τινος ἀδελφοῦ τῶν πρεσβυτέρων με ἀπείργοντος καὶ δεδιττομένου συμφύρεσθαι τῷ τῆς πονηρίας αὐτῶν βορβόρῳ, λυμανεῖσθαι γὰρ τὴν ψυχὴν τὴν ἐμαυτοῦ, καὶ ἀληθῆ γε ὡς ἠσθόμην·
 ὅραμα θεόπεμπτον προσελθὸν ἐπέρρωσέν με, καὶ λόγος πρός με γενόμενος προσέταξεν, διαρρήδην λέγων·
 ἴ’ πᾶσιν so much with regard to the question of which am speaking.
 vI.
 But when inffidlcating in the same letter, with reference to the followers of the Sabellian heresy, 1 that they were prevalentin his day, he speaks thus:
“ For astothe doetrine nowset on foot at Ρtοlemaisinthe Pentapolis, an impious doctrine which contains great blasphemy concerning the Almighty ood, Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, and great unbeliefas to Ηis only- begotten Son, the firstbornofall creation,the word who was made man, and whieh is without pereeption of the Ηοly Spirit, — when there eame to me nom both both both documents and also the brethren who were ready to discuss the question,I wrote some letters, as 1 was able by the help of God, giving an exposition of the marter ina somewhat didactic manner;
 οf which scnd thee the copies.
” VII.
 Αnd in the third οf thoseon Baptism, which the same Dionysius wrote to Philemon the Roman presbyter, he relates the following:
“ But asforme, 1 read both the compositions and the traditions ofthe heretics, polluting my soul for a little with their abominable thoughts, yet all the while deriving this advantage from them, thatI could refute them for myself and loathed them far more.
 Αnd indeeda certain brother, one of the presbyters, attempted to dissuade and frighten me from becoming involved in the mireof their wickedness, for hesaid thatI should injure my own soul;
 and said truly, asΙ perceived.
 nut a vision sent by ood cameand strengthened me, and a word of commandwas given me, saying expressly:
‘ Read all things that may come to thy οἷς ἂν εἰς χεῖρας λάβοις·
 διευθύνειν γὰρ ἕκαστα καί σοι γέγονεν ἐξ ἀρχῆς καὶ τῆς πίστεως αἴτιον. ’
 τὸ ὅραμα, ὡς ἀποστολικῇ φωνῇ συντρέχον τῆ λεγούσῃ πρὸς τοὺς δυνατωτέρους‘ γίνεσθε δόκιμοι τραπεξῖται. ’
 εἶτά τινα περὶ πασῶν εἰπὼν τῶν αἱρέσεων, ἐπιφέρει λέγων·
 “ τοῦτον ἐγὼ τὸν κανόνα καὶ τὸν τύπον παρὰ τοῦ μακαρίου πάπα ἡμῶν Ἡρακλᾶ παρέλαβον.
 τοὺς γὰρ προσιόντας ἀπὸ αἱρέσεων, καίτοι τῆς ἐκκλησίας μᾶλλον δὲ οὐδὲ ἀποστάντας, ἀλλὰ συνάγεσθαι μὲν δοκοῦντας, καταμηνυθέντας δὲ ὡς προσφοιτῶντάς τινι τῶν ἑτεροδιδασκαλούντων, ἀπελάσας τῆς ἐκκλησίας, δεομένους οὐ ἕως δημοσίᾳ πάντα ὅσα ἀκηκόασιν παρὰ ἀντιδιατιθεμένοις ἐξέφρασαν, καὶ τότε συνήγαγεν αὐτούς, οὐ δεηθεὶς ἐπ’ αὐτῶν ἑτέρου βαπτίσματος·
 τοῦ γὰρ ἁγίου πρότερον παρ’ αὐτοῦ βαπτίσματος·
 Πάλιν δὲ ἐπὶ πολὺ γυμνάσας τὸ πρόβλημα, ταῦτ’ ἐπιλέγει·
 “ μεμάθηκα καὶ τοῦτο ὅτι μὴ νῦν οἱ ἐν Αφρικῇ μόνον τοῦτο παρεισήγαγον, ἀλλὰ πολλοῦ κατὰ τοὺς πρὸ ἡμῶν ἐπισκόπους ἐν πολυανθρωποτάταις ἐκκλησίαις καὶ ταῖς συνόδοις τῶν ἀδελφῶν, ἐν Ἰκονίῳ καὶ Συνάδοις καὶ παρὰ πολλοῖς, τοῦτο ἔδοξεν·
 ὧν τὰς βουλὰς ἀνατρέπων εἰς ἔριν αὐτοὺς καὶ φιλονεικίαν ἐμβαλεῖν οὐχ ὑπομένω.
‘ οὐ γὰρ μετακινήσεις,’ φησίν, ὅρια τοῦ πλησίον σου, ἃ ἔθεντο οἱπατέρες σου"” Ἡ τετάρτη αὐτοῦ τῶν περὶ βαπτίσματος ἐπιστολῶν hand.
 For thou art able to sift and prove matter;
 Which thing Was originally the cause of thy’I accepted the vision, as agreeing with the apostolic saying addressed to the stronger:
‘ Show yourselves approved money- changers. ’
’’ Then, making certain renlarks about all the heresies, he goeOn tO say:
“ This rule and patternI reeeiVed from our blessed pope 2 Ηeraclas.
 For those Who came overfrOmthe hereries, although they had departed from the Church( Or rather, had noteVen done that, but, while srill reputed membersOf the congregation, were charged with frequenting some false teacher), he drOve rrom the Church, and refusedto listen to their entreaties until they pubhely declared all that theyhadheard frOm them that oppose themselves.’
 and thenheadmitted themto the congregation, without requiring of thema second baptism.
 For they had fOrmerly receiVed the holy baptism from him. ’
’ Αnd again, after a protracted discussiOnofthe question, he adds as follows:
 “I have learntthis also, that the AfricansdidnOt intrOduee this practice noW for the rlrst time, but that long befOre, in the days of the bishops thatwere before us, in the most populous churches and the synodsof the brethren, in Iconiumand Synnada and in many places, this eOurse was adOpted.
 ΑndΙ do not dare to overturn their deeirions and involve them in strife and comtention.
‘ For‘ For thoushaltnot remove,’ he says, neighbour’s landmarks, which thy fathers placed.’
 The fourthofhls letters on baptismwas written to στολῶν πρὸς τὸν κατὰ‘ Ρώμην τότε μὲν πρεσβείου ἠξιωμένον, οὐκ εἰς δὲ καὶ τὴν ἐπισκοπὴν τῶν ἐκεῖσε ἐξ ἧς γνῶναι πάρεστιν ὅπως καὶ αὐτὸς λόγιός τε καὶ θαυμάσιος πρὸς τοῦ κατ’ Διονυσίου μεμαρτύρηται.
 γράφει δὲ αὐτῷ μεθ’ ἕτερα τῶν κατὰ Νοουάτον μνημονεύων ἐν τούτοις·
 VIII.
 “ Νοουατιανῷ μὲν γὰρ εὐλόγως ἀπεχθανόμεθα, διακόφαντι τὴν ἐκκλησίαν καί τινας τῶν ἀδελφῶν εἰς ἀσεβείας καὶ βλασφημίας ἑλκύσαντι καὶ περὶ τοῦ θεοῦ διδασκαλίαν ἐπεισκυκλήσαντι καὶ τὸν κύριον ἡμῶν ᾿Ιησοῦν Χριστὸν ὡς ἀνηλεῆ ἐπὶ πᾶσι δὲ τούτοις τὸ λουτρὸν τὸ ἅγιον καὶ τήν τε πρὸ αὐτοῦ πίατιν καὶ ὁμολογίαν ἀνατρέποντι τό τε πνεῦμα τὸ ἅγιον ἐξ αὐτῶν, εἰ καί τις ἢν ἐλπὶς τοῦ παραμεῖναι ἢ καὶ ἐπανελθεῖν πρὸς αὐτούς, παντελῶς φυγαδεύοντι. ’
’ IX.
 καὶ ἡ πέμπτη δὲ αὐτῷ πρὸς τὸν Ῥωμαίων ἐπίσκοπον Ξύστον γέγραπτο·
 ἐν ἦ πολλὰ κατὰ τῶν αἱρετικῶν εἰπών, τοιοῦτόν τι γεγονὸς κατ’ αὐτὸν ἐκτίθεται, λέγων·
“ καὶ γὰρ ὄντως, ἀδελφέ, καὶ συμβουλῆς δέομαι καὶ γνώμην παρὰ σοῦ, τοιούτου τινός μοι προσελθόντος πράγματος, μὴ ἄρα αφάλλομαι.
 τῶν γὰρ συναγομένων ἀδελφῶν πιατὸς νομιζόμενος ἀρχαῖος καὶ πρὸ τῆς ἐμῆς χειροτονίας, οἶμαι δὲ καὶ τῆς τοῦ μακαρίου Ἡρακλᾶ καταστάσεως, τῆς μετασχών, τοῖς ὑπόγυον παρατυχὼν καὶ τῶν ἐπερωτήσεων καὶ τῶν ἐπακούσας, προσῆλθέν μοι κλαίων καταθρηνῶν ἑαυτὸν καὶ πίπτων πρὸ τῶν ποδῶν Dionysius of Rome, who at that timehad been deemed worthy of the presbyterate, but not long afterwards received also the episcopate there.
 from it one may learn how that he too had witness paid him by Dionysius Alexandriaforhis learning and admirable qualities.
 In the course of his letter to him he mentions the affair of Novatus in the following terms:
 VIII.
“ For itis with good reason indeed that we feelenmitytowards Novatian,who causedain the church and drew away some of the brethren to impieues and blasphemies, and introduced as well most profane teaching about God, and falsely accouses our most compassionate Lord Jesus Christ of being without mercy;
 and above all this, he sets at naught the holy washing, and overturns the faith and confession that precede it, and entirely banishes the Ηoly sprit from them, even though there was some hope οf Ηis remaining with or even returning to them.
” IX.
 Αnd his fifth letter was written to Xystus, bishop ofthe Romans.
 In it, speaking muchagainstthe heretics,he sets forth the following thing that happened in his day, saying:
 “ ofatruth, brother,I have need of counsel, and askan opinion of thee.
 The following matter has come before me, and 1 am fearful lest after allI be mistaken.
 of the brethrenwho meet together for worship there is one, reckoned faithful,of long stanffing,a member of the congregation before my ordination, and,I think, before the appointment of the blessed Heraclas.
 Having been present with those who were recently being baptized, and having heard the questions and answers,he came tome in tears, bewailing himself andfalling before μου, ἐξομολογούμενος μὲν καὶ ἐξομνύμενος τὸ βάπτισμα, δ’ παρὰ τοῖς αἱρετικοῖς ἐξομνύμενος μὴ τοῦτο εἶναι μηδὲ ὅλως ἔχειν τινὰ πρὸς τοῦτο κοινωνίαν, ἀσεβείας γὰρ ἐκεῖνο καὶ βλασφημιῶν κατανενύχθαι λέγων δὲ πάνυ τι τὴν Ψυχὴν νῦν κατανενύχθαι καὶ μηδὲ παρρησίαν ἔχειν ἐπᾶραι τοὺς ὀφθαλμοὺς πρὸς τὸν θεὸν ἀπὸ τῶν ἀνοσίων ἐκείνων ῥημάτων καὶ πραγμάτων ὁρμώμενος, καὶ διὰ τοῦτο δεόμενος τῆς εἰλικρινεστάτης ταύτης καθάρσεως καὶ παραδοχῆς καὶ χάριτος τυχεῖν·
 ὅπερ ἐγὼ μὲν οὐκ ἐτόλμησα ποιῆσαι, φήσας αὐτάρκη τὴν πολυχρόνιον αὐτῷ κοινωνίαν εἰς τοῦτο γεγονέναι.
 εὐχαριστίας γὰρ ἐπακούσαντα καὶ συνεπιφθεγξάμενον τὸ ἀμὴν καὶ τραπέζῃ παραστάντα καὶ χεῖρας εἰς ὑποδοχὴν τῆς ἁγίας τροφῆς προτείναντα καὶ ταύτην καταδεξάμενον καὶ τοῦ σώματος καὶ τοῦ αἵματος τοῦ κυρίου ἡμῶν μετασχόντα χρόνῳ, οὐκ ἂν ἐξ ὑπαρχῆς ἀνασκευάζειν ἔτι τολμήσαιμι·
 θαρσεῖν δὲ ἐκέλευον καὶ μετὰ βεβαίας πίστεως καὶ ἀγαθῆς ἐλπίδος τῆ μετοχῇ τῶν ἁγίων προσιέναι.
 ὃ δὲ οὔτε πενθῶν παύεται πέφρικέν τε τῇ τραπέζῃ προσιέναι καὶ μόλις παρακαλούμενος συνεστάναι ταῖς προσευχαῖς ἀνέχεται.
” Επὶ ταῖς προειρημέναις φέρεταί τις καὶ ἄλλη τοῦ αὐτοῦ περὶ βαπτίσματος ἐπιστολή, ἐξ αὐτοῦ καὶ ἦς ἡγεῖτο παροικίας Ξύστῳ καὶ τῆ κατὰ Ρώμην ἐκκλησίᾳ προσπεφωνημένη,, ἐν ἧ διὰ μακρᾶς ἀποδείξεως τὸν περὶ τοῦ ὑποκειμένου ζητήματος παρατείνει λόγον.
 καὶ ἄλλη δέ τις αὐτοῦ μετὰ ταύτας φέρεται πρὸς τὸν κατὰ Ῥώμην ἡ περὶ Λουκισνοῦ.
 καὶ περὶ μὲν τούτων τοσαῦτα.
 Χ.
 Οἵ γε μὴν ἀμφὶ τὸν Γάλλον οὐδ’ ὅλοις ἔτεσιν my feet;
 confessing and swearing that the baptism with which he had been baptized by the heretics, was not such as this and had nothing in common with it inasmuch as it had been full οf impietiesand blasphemies.
 Ηe said thathe was now altogetherpricked in heart and had not courage so much as to lift up his eyes to God, after beginning with those unholy words and deeds;
 and therefore he begged that he night receive this most pure cleansing and reception and grace.
 This I for my part did notdareto do, saying that his long- standing communion with us had been sufficient for this purpose.
 For since he had heard the Thanksgiving and joined in sayingthe Αmen, and stood beside the Table and stretched forth his hands to receive the holy food, and had reeeived it and partakenof the Body and Blood of οur Lord rora long time,I should not dareto build him up again from the beginning.
 ButI kept exhortinghimto be ofgood courage, and to approach for the participation οf the holy things with firm faith and good hope.
 nut he never ceases his lament, and shudders to approach the Table, and searcely, though invited, does he dare to take his stand with the consistentes at the prayers.
 1” In addition to the above- mentioned letters, there is extant also another of hisOn Baptism,addressed by himandthe community over which he ruled to Xystus and the church at Rome, in which witha long proofhe gives a protracted discussion of the the subject in question.
 Αnd, after these, there is yet another letter of his extant, to Dionysius at Rome, that with referenceto Lucian.
 so much for these matters.
 X.
 But to resume.
 Gallus and his associates held δύο τὴν ἀρχὴν ἐπικατασχόντες, ἐκποδὼν μεθίστανται, Οὐαλεριανὸςδ’ ἅμα παιδὶ Γαλλιήνῳ διαδέχεται τὴν ἡγεμονίαν.
 αὖθις δὴ οὖν ὁ Διονύσιος οἷα καὶ περὶ τούτου διέξεισιν, ἐκ τῆς πρὸς Ἑρμάμμωνα ἐπιστολῆς μαθεῖν ἔστιν, ἐν ἦ τοῦτον ἱστορεῖ τὸν τρόπον·
“ καὶ τῷ Ἰωάννῃ δὲ ὁμοίως ἀπολαλοῦν καλύπτεται·
‘ καὶ ἐδόθη γὰρ αὐτῷ,’ φησίν,‘ στόμα μεγάλα καὶ βλασφημίαν, καὶ ἐδόθη αὐτῷ ἐξουσία καὶ μῆνες βλασφημίαν, δύο.’
 ἀμφότερα δὲ ἔστιν ἐπὶ Οὐαλεριανοῦ θαυμάσαι καὶ τούτων μάλιστα τὰ πρῶτα ὡς οὕτως ἔσχεν, συννοεῖν ὡς μὲν ἤπιος καὶ φιλόφρων ἦν πρὸς τοὺς ἀνθρώπους τοῦ θεοῦ·
 οὐδὲ γὰρ ἄλλος τις οὕτω τῶν πρὸ αὐτοῦ βασιλέων εὐμενῶς καὶ δεξιῶς πρὸς αὐτοὺς διετέθη, οὐδ’ οἱ λεχθέντες ἀναφανδὸν χριστιανοὶ γεγονέναι, ὡς ἐκεῖνος οἰκειότατα ἐν ἀρχῇ καὶ προσφιλέστατα φανερὸς ἦν αὐτοὺς ἄπο·
 καὶ πᾶς τε ὁ οἶκος αὐτοῦ θεοσεβῶν πεπλήρωτο καὶ ἢν ἐκκλησία θεοῦ·
 ἀποσκευάσασθαι δὲ παρέπεισεν αὐτὸν ὁ διδάσκαλος καὶ τῶν ἀπ’ Αἰγύπτου μάγων ἀρχισυνάγωγος, τοὺς μὲν καθαροὺς καὶ ὁσίους ἄνδρας κτείννυσθαι καὶ διώκεσθαι κελεύων ὡς ἀντιπάλους καὶ κωλυτὰς τῶν παμμιάρων καὶ βδελυκτῶν ἐπαοιδῶν ὑπάρχοντας καὶ γὰρ εἰσὶν καὶ ἦσαν ἱκανοί, παρόντες καὶ ὁρώμενοι καὶ μόνον ἐμπνέοντες καὶ φθεγγόμενοι διασκεδάσαι τὰς τῶν ἀλιτηρίων δαιμόνων ἐπιβουλάς), τελετὰς δὲ ἀνάγνους καὶ μαγγανείας ἐξαγίστους καὶ( The text differssomewhat from that ofA.
 V.
 and R.
 V.
) 2 Apparently, in the preceding context, Dionysius had quoted a passage οf Scripture, not fromthe Apocalypse,the principate for less than two entire years, and then were removed out of the way;
 and Valerian along with his son Gallienus succeeded to the government.
 Once more we may learn from his letter to Hermammon the description that Dionysius gives of him also;
 in Which he gives an account of the following kind:
“ Αnd to Johnalso it is likewise revealed:
‘ Αnd therewasgiven to him,᾿ says he,‘a speaking greatthingsand blasphemy, and there was given to him authority and forty and two months.
᾿ Οne may wonder at bothof these things2 under Valerian, and of them note espeeially the nature ofhisprevious conduct, 3 how mild and friendly he was to the men of God.
 For not a single one of the emperors beforehim was so kindlyandfavourablydisposed towards them, not even those who said to have been openly Christians, as he manifestlywas, when he received them at the beginningin the most intimateand friendly manner;
 indeed all his house had been ffiled with godly persons, and wasa church of God.
 But the master and ruler of the synagogue of the Egyptian magicians4 persuaded him to getridof them, bidding him slay and pursue the pure and holy men, as being rivals and dinderers of his abominable and disgusting incantations( for indeed they are and were capableby their presenceand sight, and by merely breathing on them and uttering words, of the derignsof the baneful demons).
 Αnd he advised him to perform unhallowed rites, and abominable juggleries and illwhich ρουργίας ἀκαλλιερήτους ἐπιτελεῖν παῖδας ἀθλίους ἀποσφάττειν καὶ τέκνα δυστήνων πατέρων καταθύειν καὶ σπλάγχνα νεογενῆ διαιρεῖν καὶ τὰ τοῦ θεοῦ διακόπτειν καὶ καταχορδεύειν πλάσματα, ὡς ἐκ τούτων εὐδαιμονήσοντας.
” καὶ τούτοις γε ἐπιφέρει λέγων·
“ καλὰ γοῦν αὐτοῖς Μακριανὸς τῆς ἐλπιζομένης βασιλείας προσήνεγκεν χαριστήρια·
 ὃς πρότερον μὲν ἐπὶ τῶν καθόλου λόγων λεγόμενος εἶναι βασιλέως, οὐδὲν εὔλογον οὐδὲ καθολικὸν ἐφρόνησεν, ἀλλ’ ὑποπέπτωκεν ἀρᾷ προφητικῇ τῇ λεγούσῃἴ’ οὐαὶ τοῖς προφητεύουσιν ἀπὸ καρδίας αὐτῶν καὶ τὸ καθόλου μὴ βλέπουσιν’·
 οὐ γὰρ συνῆκεν τὴν καθόλου πρόνοιαν, οὐδὲ τὴν κρίσιν ὑπείδετο τοῦ πρὸ πάντων καὶ διὰ πάντων καὶ ἐπὶ πᾶσιν, δι’ ὃ καὶ τῆς μὲν καθολικῆς ὁ καὶ τῆς μὲν καθολικῆς αὐτοῦ πολέμιος, ἠλλοτρίωσεν δὲ καὶ ἀπεξένωσεν ἑαυτὸν τοῦ ἐλέους τοῦ θεοῦ καὶ πορρωτάτω τῆς ἑαυτοῦ σωτηρίας ἐφυγάδευσεν, ἐν τούτῳ τὸ ἴδιον ἐπαληθεύων ὄνομα.
” Καὶ πάλιν μεθ’ ἕτερά φησιν·
 “ ὁ μὲν γὰρ Οὐαλεριανὸς εἰς ταῦτα ὑπὸ τούτου προαχθείς, εἰς ὕβρεις καὶ ὀνειδισμοὺς ἐκδοθείς, κατὰ τὸ ῥηθὲν πρὸς‘ Hσαΐαν·
 ἴ’ καὶ οὗτοι ἐξελέξαντο τὰς ὁδοὺς αὐτῶν καὶ τὰ βδελύγματα αὐτῶν, ἡ ψυχὴ ἠθέλησεν, καὶ ἐγὼ ἐκλέξομαι τὰ ἐμπαίγματα αὐτῶν, καὶ τὰς ἁμαρτίας ἀνταποδώσω αὐτοῖς’·
 οὗτος δὲ τῇ βασιλείᾳ παρὰ τὴν ἀξίαν ἐπιμανεὶς οmened sacrifices, such as cutting the throats of wretched boys and sacrificing children of hapless parents and opening up the entrails of new- born babes, and cutting up and mincing the handywork as if all this would bring them divine favour.
” And in additionhe goes on tosay:
 “ Goodly at all events were the thank- offerings that Macrianus madeto them for the Empire of his hopes.
 1 Formerly when he was regarded as minister over the imperial accounts asa whole,he displayed neithera reasenable noracatholic mind.
 But he has fallen under the prophetic curse which says:
‘ Woe unto them that prophesyfrom their heart, and see not the whole.
᾿ For hedid not understandthe universal nor did he suspeet the judgement of Himwhois before allandthrough all and over all.
 Therefore he has come tobe at enmity withHisCatholic Church,and so alienated and estranged himself from God's mercy and banished himself as far as possible fromhisown salvations, in this proving true his name.
” Αnd again, after Other remarks, he says:
“ For Valerian, being induced by him to this course of aetion, Was given overtoinsults and reproaches, according to that which was said to Isaiah:
“ Αnd these have Chosen their own ways and abominations, in whichtheir soul delighteth, andIwill their mockings, and their sinsI will recompense them.
᾿ now this man,3 in his mad desirefor καὶ τὸν βασίλειον ὑποδῦναι κόσμον ἀδυνατῶν ἀναπήρῳ τῷ σώματι, τοὺς δύο παῖδας τὰς πατρῴας ἀναδεξαμένους ἁμαρτίας προεκτήσατο.
 ἐναργὴς γὰρ ἐπὶ τούτων ἡ πρόρρησις ἢν εἶπεν ὁ θεός·
 ἀποδιδοὺς ἁμαρτίας πατέρων ἐπὶ τέκνα ἕως τρίτης καὶ τετάρτης γενεᾶς τοῖς μιαοῦαίν με. ’
 τὰς γὰρ ἰδίας πονηρὰς ἐπιθυμίας, ὧν ἠτύχει, ταῖς τῶν υἱῶν κεφαλαῖς ἐπιβαλών, εἰς ἐκείνους τὴν ἑαυτοῦ κακίαν καὶ τὸ πρὸς τὸν θεὸν μῖσος ἐξωμόρξατο.
” καὶ περὶ μὲν τοῦ Οὐλπιανοῦ τοσαῦτα ὁ Διονύσιος·
 XI.
 περὶ δὲ τοῦ κατ’ αὐτὸν διωγμοῦ αφοδρότατα πνεύσαντος οἷα σὐν ἑτέροις ὁ αὐτὸς διὰ τὴν εἰς τὸν τῶν ὅλων θεὸν εὐσέβειαν ὑπέατη, δηλώσουσιν αἱ αὐτοῦ φωναὶ ἃς πρὸς Γερμανὸν τῶν κατ’ αὐτὸν ἐπιακόπων κακῶς ἀγορεύειν αὐτὸν πειρώμενον ἀποτεινόμενος, τοῦτον παρατίθεται τὸν τρόπον·
 “ εἰς ἀφροαύνην δὲ κινδυνεύω πολλὴν καὶ ἀναιαθηαίαν ὄντως ἐμπεαεῖν, εἰς ἀνάγκην συμβιβαζόμενος τοῦ διηγεῖσθαι τὴν θαυμαστὴν περὶ ἡμᾶς οἰκονομίαν τοῦ θεοῦ·
 ἀλλ’ ἐπεὶ μυστήριον,’ φησίν,‘ βασιλέως κρύφαι καλόν, τὰ δὲ ἔργα τοῦ θεοῦ ἀνακαλύπτειν ἔνδοξον,’ ὁμόσε χωρήσω τῆ Γερμανοῦ βίᾳ.
 ἧκον πρὸς Αἰμιλιανόν, οὐ μόνος, ἠκολούθη δέ μοι αυμπρεαβύτερός τέ μου Μάξιμος καὶ διάκονοι Φαῦστος Εὐσέβιος Χαιρήμων, καί τις τῶν ἀπὸ Ῥώμης παρόντων ἀδελφῶν ἡμῖν αυνειαῆλθεν.
 Αἰμιλιανὸς δὲ οὐκ εἰπέν μοι προγηουμένωςἴ’ μὴ σύναγε.’
 περιττὸν γὰρ τοῦτο ἦν αὐτῷ καὶ τὸ τελευταῖον, ἐπὶ τὸ πρῶτον ἀνα- τρέχοντι·
 οὐ γὰρ περὶ τοῦ μὴ συνάγειν ἑτέρους ὁ imperial rule of Which hewasnot worthy,and unable to deck his maimed body With the imperial robes, put forwardhis two sons, who thusreceived their father's sins.
 For in them was clearly fulfilled the prophecy thatGod spake:
 ῾Visiting the rins of fathers upon children, until the third and fourth generation in them that hate me.
᾿ For hisownevil desires, in vhieh he failed, he heaped upon the heads of his sons, and so wiped off on them his own wickedness and his hatred toward God.
" This is the account given by dionysius concerning valerian.
 XI.
 But With regard to the storm of persecution that raged fiercely in his day, What the same Dionysius, and others with him, underwent for their piety toward the God of the universe will be made plainby his own words which he wrote at length against Germanus, one of the bishops of his day who was attempting to defame him.
 Ηe makes his statement in the following manner:
“ ButΙam in dangerof falling, in truth, into greatfoolishness and stupidity, being foreedto the pointofcompulsion to recountthewonderful dispensation of God concerning us.
 But since ῾it is good,᾿ he says, ῾to keep close the secretofa king, but glorious to reveal the works of God,᾿ God,῾I will join issue withthe Germanus.
 I came before Aemilianus,1 not alone, but there followed me my fellow- presbyter maximus, and Faurtus, Εusebius, Chaeremon, deacons;
 and one of the brethren who had come from Rome entered in along with us.
 And Aemilianus did not lead off with the words ῾Do not hold essemblies.
' For that would have been superfluous forhim to say, and the last thing to be mentioned by onewhowas going back to the very beginning.
 For his discourse ΕUsEBIUs λόγος ἦν αὐτῷ, ἀλλὰ περὶ τοῦ μηδ’ αὐτοὺς ἡμᾶς εἶναι χριστιανούς, καὶ τούτου προσέταττεν εἰ μεταβαλοίμην ἐγώ, καὶ τοὺς ἄλλους ἕφεαθαί μοι νομίζων.
 ἀπεκρινάμην δὲ οὐκ ἀπεοικότως ἐοικότως οὐδὲ μακρὰν τοῦ πειθαρχεῖν δεῖ θεῷ μᾶλλον ἢ ἀνθρώποις,’ ἀλλ’ ἄντικρυς διεμαρτυράμην ὅτι τὸν θεὸν τὸν ὄντα μόνον καὶ οὐδένα ἕτερον σέβω οὐδ’ ἂν μεταθείμην οὐδὲ παυσαίμην Χριστιανὸς ὤν.
 ἐπὶ τούτοις ἐκέλευσεν ἡμᾶς ἀπελθεῖν εἰς κώμην πλησίον τῆς ἐρήμου καλουμένην Κεφρώ.
“ Αὐτῶν δὲ ἐπακούσατε τῶν ὑπ’ ἁμφοτέρων λεχθέντων ὡς ὑπεμνηματίσθη.
 εἰσαχθέντων καὶ Φαύατου καὶ Μαξίμου καὶ Μαρκέλλου καὶ Χαιρήμονος Αἰμιλιανὸς διέπων τὴν ἡγεμονίαν εἶπεν·
 ἴ’ καὶ ἀγράφως ὑμῖν διελέχθην περὶ τῆς φιλανθρωπίας τῶν κυρίων ἡμῶν ᾖ περὶ ὑμᾶς κέχρηνται·
 δεδώκασιν γὰρ ἐξουσίαν ὑμῖν σωτηρίας, εἰ βούλοισθε ἐπὶ τὸ κατὰ φύσιν τρέπεαθαι καὶ θεοὺς τοὺς σῴζοντας αὐτῶν τὴν βασιλείαν ἐπιΛαθέσθαι δὲ τῶν παρὰ φύσιν.
 τί οὖν φατὲ πρὸς ταῦτα;
 οὐδὲ γὰρ ἀχαρίστους ὑμᾶς ἔσεσθαι περὶ τὴν φιλανθρωπίαν αὐτῶν προσδοκῶ, ἐπειδήπερ ἐπὶ τὰ βελτίω ὑμᾶς προτρέπονται.’
 “ Διονύσιος ἀπεκρίνατο·
 ἴ’ οὐ πάντες πάντας προακυνοῦαι θεούς, ἀλλ᾿ ἕκαστοι τινάς, ἕκαστοι οὓς ἡμεῖς τοίνυν τὸν ἕνα θεὸν καὶ δημιουργὸν τῶν ἁπάντων, τὸν καὶ τὴν βασιλείαν ἐγχειρίσαντα τοῖς θεοφιλεστάτοις Οὐαλεριανῷ καὶ Γαλλιήνῳ Σεβαατοῖς, τοῦτον καὶ σέβομεν καὶ καὶ τούτῳ διηνεκῶς ὑπὲρ τῆς βασιλείας αὐτῶν, ὅπως ἀσάλευτος διαμείνῃ, was not about not assembling others, but about not being Christians ourselves, and from that he ordered me to desist, thinking thatifI were to change, the οthers also would follow me.
 ButI gaveareply that was not inappropriate, nor far from ῾We must obey God rather than men’;
 yea,I testffied outright thatI worship the only Godand none other, nor would change or ever cease to bea Christian.
 Thereupon he bade us departtoa village nearthe desert, Cephro.
“ But hear the things themselves that were spokenὢ both sides, as they were placed on record:
 When Dionysius and Faustus and Maximus and Marcellus and chaeremon were brought into eourt, Aemilianus,the deputy-prefect, said,‘.
.
.
 Αnd verballyI discoursed with you concerning the kindness that our lords1 have displayedon your behalf.
 For they gave you the opportunity of safety if ye were willing to turn to that which is according to nature and worship the gods which preserve their Εmpire, and forget those gods which are contrary to nature.
 What, therefore,say ye to these things? ForIdo not expect thatye will be ungrateful for their kindess, forasmuch as they urge you on to the better urse.
 '“ Dionysius replied:
‘ Νot allmenWorship all ods, but eachone certain whomhe regards as such.
 therefore both worship and adore the οne God and aker of all things, who also committed the Εmpire the Augusti, most highly favoured of God, Valeriand Gallienus;
 and to Ηim we unceasingly prayfor their Empire, that itmay remain unshaken.
 “ Αἰμιλιανὸς διέπων τὴν ἡγεμονίαν αὐτοῖς εἶπεν·
 ῾τίς γὰρ ὑμᾶς κωλύει καὶ τοῦτον, εἴπερ ἐστὶν θεός, μετὰ τῶν κατὰ φύαιν θεῶν προσκυνεῖν;
 θεοὺς γὰρ αέβειν ἐκελεύσθητε.
 καὶ θεοὺς οὓς πάντες ἴσασιν.
᾿ “ Διονύσιος ἀπεκρίνατο·
 ῾ἡμεῖς οὐδένα ἕτερον προακυνουΥεν.’
“ Αἰμιλιανὸς διέπων τὴν ἡγεμονίαν αὐτοῖς εἶπεν·
 ῾ὁρῶ ὑμᾶς ὁμοῦ καὶ ἀχαρίατους ὄντας καὶ ἀναισθήτους τῆς πρᾳότητος τῶν Σεβαστῶν ἡμῶν·
 δι’ ὅπερ οὐκ ἔαεαθε ἐν τῇ πόλει ταύτῃ, ἀλλὰ ἀποσταλήαεαθε εἰς τὰ μέρη τῆς Λιβύης καὶ ἐν τόπῳ λεγομένῳ Kεφρώ·
 τοῦτον γὰρ τὸν τόπον ἐξελεξάμην ἐκ τῆς κελεύσεως τῶν Σεβαατῶν ἡμῶν.
 οὐδαμῶς δὲ ἐξέσται οὔτε ὑμῖν οὔτε ἄλλοις τισὶν ἢ συνόδους ποιεῖαθαι ἢ εἰς τὰ καλούμενος κοιμητήρια εἰαιέναι.
 εἰ δέ τις φανείη ἢ μὴ γενόμενος εἰς τὸν τόπον τοῦτον ὃν ἐκέλευσα, ἢ ἐν συναγωγῇτινι εὑρεθείη, ἑαυτῷ τὸν κίνδυνον ἐπαρτήσει·
 οὐ γὰρ ἐπιλείψει ἡ δέουσα ἐπιατρέφεια.
 ἀπόατητε οὗν ὅπου ἐκελεύοθητε.
 ᾿ “ Καὶ νοσοῦντα δέ με κατήπειξεν, οὐδὲ μιᾶς ὑπέρθεαιν δοὺς ἡμέρας.
 ποίαν οὖν ἔτι τοῦ αυνάγειν ἢ μὴ αυνάγειν εἶχον σχολήν; ’
 Eἶτα μεθ’ ἕτερά φηαιν·
 “ ἀλλ᾿ οὐδὲ τῆς αἰἡμεῖς μετὰ τοῦ κυρίου αυναγωγῆς ἀπέατημεν, ἀλλὰ τοὺς μὲν ἐν τῆ πόλει απουδαιότερον συνεκρότουν ὡς συνών, ἀπὼν μὲν τῷ σώματι,᾿ ὡς εἶπεν, ῾παρὼν δὲ τῷ πνεύματι,᾿ ἐν δὲ τῆ Kεφροῖ καὶ πολλὴ αυνεπεδήμηαεν ἡμῖν ἐκκλησία, τῶν μὲν ἀπὸ τῆς πόλεως ἀδελφῶν ἑπομένων, τῶν δὲ συνιόντων ἀπ’ Αἰγύπτου.
 κἀκεῖ θύραν ἡμῖν ὁ“ Aemilianus,the deputy- prefect, said to them:
῾ Αnd who preventsyou from worshipping this also, if hebea god, along with the natural gods? For ye were bidden to worship gods, and gods whom all know.
 '“ Dionysius replied:
‘ We worshipno other God.
'“ Aemilianus, the deputy- prefect, said to them:
 ‘I see that yeare at onee ungratefuland insensible of the clemency οf οur Αugusti.
 Wherefore ye shall not be in this city, but ye shall betake yourselves to the parts of Libya and remainina place ealled Cephro.
 For this is the place 1 chose in accordance with the command οf our Augusti.
 Αnd it shall in no wise be permitted either to you or to any others either to hold assemblies or to enterthe cemeteries,1 as theyare called.
 If anyone be proved not to have gone to the place thatI commanded, or be found at any assembly, he will bring the peril upon himself, for there shall be no laek οf the necessary observation.
 Be gone therefore whither ye were bidden.
 '“ Αnd even thoughIwas sick, he hurried me away without granting me a single’s respite.
 What spare time hadI then remaining either for holding οr not holding an assembly?’’ Then after other remarks he says:
“ But wedid not abstain from even the visible assembling of ourselves with the Lord;
 nay, 1 strove the more earnestly to gather together thosein the city, as ifΙwere with them,‘ being abSent in body,' as he2 said,‘ but present in spirit,᾿ and at Cephroa large churck also sojourned with us, some brethren following us from the city, οthers joining us from Egypt.
 And θεὸς ἀνέῳξεν τοῦ λόγου.
 καὶ τὸ μὲν πρῶτον ἐδιώχθημεν, ἐλιθοβολήθημεν, ὕατερον δέ τινες οὐκ ὀλίγοι τῶν ἐθνῶν τὰ εἴδωλα καταλιπόντες, ἐπέστρεψαν ἐπὶ τὸν θεόν·
 οὐ πρότερον δὲ παραδεξαμένοις αὐτοῖς τότε πρῶτον δι’ ἡμῶν ὁ λόγος ἐπεαπάρη, καὶ ὥαπερ τούτου ἕνεκεν ἀπαγαγὼν ἡμᾶς πρὸς αὐτοὺς ὁ θεός, ἐπεὶ τὴν διακονίαν ταύτην ἐπληρώααμεν, πάλιν ἀπαγήοχεν.
“ Ὁ γὰρ Αἰμιλιανὸς εἰς τραχυτέρους μέν, ὡς ἐδόκει, καὶ Λιβυκωτέρους ἡμᾶς μεταστῆσαι τόπους ἐκέλευσεν καὶ τοὺς πανταχόσε εἰς τὸν Μαρεώτην ἐκέλευσεν συρρεῖν, κώμας ἑκάστοις τῶν χώραν ἀφορίσας, ἡμᾶς δὲ μᾶλλον ἐν ὁδῷ καὶ πρώτους καταληφθησομένους ἔταξεν.
 γὰρ δῆλον ὅτι καὶ παρεσκεύαζεν ἵνα ὁπόταν βουληθείη αυλλαβεῖν, πάντας εὐαλώτους ἔχοι.
 ἐγὼ δὲ ὅτε μὲν εἰς Κεφρὼ κεκελεύαμην ἀπελθεῖν, καὶ τὸν τόπον ἠγνόουν ὅποι ποτὲ οὗτός ἐστιν, οὐδὲ τὸ ὄνομα αχεδὸν πρότερον ἀκηκοώς, καὶ ὅμως εὐθύμως καὶ ἀταράχως ἀπῄειν·
 ἐπεὶ δὲ μεταακηνώαειν εἰς τὰ Κολλουθίωνος ἀπηγγέλη μοι, ἴσασιν οἱ παρόντες ὅπως διετέθην ἐνταῦθα γὰρ ἐμαυτοῦ κατηγορήσω), τὸ μὲν πρῶτον ἠχθέσθην καὶ λίαν ἐχαλέπηνα·
 καὶ γὰρ εἰ γνωριμώτεροι καὶ συνηθέστεροι ἐτύγχανον ἡμῖν οἱ τόποι, ἔρημον μὲν ἀδελφῶν καὶ σπουδαίων ἀνθρώπων ἔφασκον εἶναι τὸ χωρίον, ταῖς δὲ τῶν ὁδοιπορούντων ἐνοχλήσεσιν καὶ λῃστῶν ἐκκείμενον·
 ἔτυχον δὲ παραμυθίας, ὑπομνησάντων με τῶν ἀδελφῶν ὅτι γειτνιῴη μᾶλλον τῆ πόλει καὶ ἡ μὲν Κεφρὼ πολλὴν ἡμῖν ἦγεν ἀδελφῶν τῶν ere God οpened unto us a door for the word.
 Αndt first we were pursued,we were stoned, but afterardsnota few oftheheathen left their idolsand urned to God.
 nen for the nrst time was the word wn through our ageney among those who had not formerly received it.
 It was, as it were, for this that God took us away to them, and, when we had fulffiled this ministratio, took us away again.
 ‘‘ For Aemilianus wishedto remove usto rougher,as he thought, and more Libyan- like places, and he ade those who were seattered in every direction to stream together to the Mareotian nome, assigning mparate rillages in the district for each party;
 but us he posted more on the road, so thatwe should behe first to be arrested.
 For he eridently was managing and arranging it, that, whenever he wished to eize us, he might find us all easy of capture.
 Αs οr me, whenIhad been biddentodepart to Cephro, did not even know in what directionthe place lay, carcely haring heard so much as the name before;
 everthelessI departed witha good grace and madeo disturbance.
 But when it was told me thatIwas removetothe parts of Colluthion, those who were resent know how I was affected( for hereI shall be own aecuser):
 at nffirs1was vexed and exceedly angry;
 for although the places happened to better known and more familiar to us, yet itwas rmed that the district was without brethrenor ersons of good character, and exposed besides to oyances of travellers and incursions of robbers.
 ut I found encouragement when the brethren reinded me that it was nearerthe city,1 and that, hile Cephro used to bring us much intercourse with ἀπ’ Αἰγύπτου τὴν ἐπιμιξίαν, ὡς πλατύτερον ἐκκλησιάζειν δύνασθαι, ἐκεῖ δέ, πλησιαίτερον οὔσης τῆς πόλεως, συνεχέστερον τῆς τῶν ὄντως καὶ οἰκειοτάτων καὶ φιλτάτων ὄφεως ἀπολαύσομεν·
 ἀφίξονται γὰρ καὶ ἀναπαύσονται καὶ ὡς ἐν προαστείοις πορρωτέρω κειμένοις κατὰ μέρος ἔσονται αυναγωγαί.
 καὶ οὕτως ἐγένετο. ’
’ καὶ μεθ’ ἕτερα περὶ τῶν συμβεβηκότων αὐτῷ αὖθις ταῦτα γράφει·
 “ πολλαῖς γε ταῖς ὁμολογίαις Γερμανὸς σεμνύνεται, πολλά γε εἰπεῖν ἔχει ἑαυτοῦ γενόμενα·
 δάας ἀριθμῆσαι δύναται ἡμῶν ἀποφάσεις, δημεύσεις, ἀρχόντων ἁρπαγάς, ἀξιωμάτων ἀποθέσεις, δόξης κοαμικῆς ὀλιγωρίας, ἐπαίνων ἡγεμονικῶν καὶ βουλευτικῶν καταφρονήσεις καὶ τῶν ἐναντίων, ἀπειλῶν καὶ καταβοήσεων καὶ κινδύνων καὶ διωγμῶν καὶ πλάνης καὶ στενοχωρίας καὶ ποικίλης θλίφεως ὑπομονήν, οἷα τὰ ἐπὶ Δεκίου καὶ Σαβίνου αυμβάντα μοι, οἷα μέχρι νῦν Αἰμιλιανοῦ.
 ποῦ δὲ Γερμανὸς ἐφάνη;
 τίς δὲ περὶ αὐτοῦ λόγος;
 ἀλλὰ τῆς πολλῆς ἀφροσύνης, εἰς ἢν ἐμπίπτω διὰ ὑφίεμαι, δι’ὃ καὶ τὴν καθ’ ἕκαστον γενομένων διήγησιν παρίημι τοῖς εἰδόσιν λέγειν.’
 ’ Ὁδ’ αὐτὸς καὶ ἐν τῇ πρὸς Δομέτιον καὶ Δίδυμον ἐπιστολῇ τῶν ἀμφὶ τὸν διωγμὸν αὖθις ἐν τούτοις·
 “ τοὺς δὲ ἡμετέρους πολλούς τε ὄντας καὶ ἀγνῶτας ὑμῖν, περισσὸν ὀνομαστὶ πλὴν ἴστε ὅτι ἄνδρες καὶ γυναῖκες, καὶ νέοι καἰ γέροντες, καὶ κόραι καὶ πρεσβύτιδες, καὶ στρατιῶται καὶ ἰδιῶται, καὶ πᾶν γένος καὶ πᾶσα ἡλικία, οἱ μὲν διὰ μαστίγων καὶ πυρός, οἱ δὲ διὰ αιδήρου τὸν brethren from Εgypt, so that there wasa wider arca from which to gathera congregation, yet there, from the nearer positionof the city, we should enjoy seeing more constantly those really beloved and most intimate and dear.
 They would come, they said, and staythe night, and, as inthe more remotesuburban districts, there would be sectional assemblies.
 And so it proved.
” Αnd, after other remarks with referenee to hathappened to him, he writes againas follows:
“ Μany, to be sure,are the confessions on which Germanus prides himself, many the happenings to his hurt of which he has to tell— even allthe things thathe makea list of as regardsus:
 sentenees, confiscations, proscriptions, spoiling of possessions, losses of dignities, despisings of worldly glory, disdainings of commendations and the reverse from prefect and council, endurance of threats, outcries, perils, persecutions, wanderings, anguish and divers tribulations, such as happened to me under Deeius and sabinus, up to the present time under Aemilianus.
 But Where did Germanus appear? What talk was there about him? ButΙ must cease from the great folly into whichΙ am falling on account of Germanus;
 wherefore alsoI forbear to givein detail to the brethrenwho know them an accountofthe events.
" The same Dionysius, in the letter also to Domitiusand Didymus, mentions again the happenings of the persecution, aS follows:
:
“ But itissuperfluousto recount bynameour people,since they are numerous and unknown to you.
 Οnly understand thatmen and women, both οldmenand lads, both girlsand aged women, both soldiersand civilians, both every raceand every age, some enduring scourgings and fire, ἀγῶνα νικήσαντες, τοὺς στεφάνους ἀπειλήφασιν·
 τοῖς δὲ οὐ πάμπολυς αὐτάρκης ἀπέβη χρόνος εἰς τὸ φανῆναι δεκτοὺς τῷ κυρίῳ, ὥαπερ οὖν ἔοικεν μηδὲ ἐμοὶ μέχρι νῦν, διόπερ εἰς ὃν οἶδεν ἐπιτήδειον καιρὸν ὑπερέθετό με ὁ λέγων καιρῷ δεκτῷ ἐπήκουσά ἀοῦ, καὶ ἐν ἡμέρᾳ σωτηρίας ἐβοήθησά σοι.
 ' τὰ γὰρ καθ’ ἡμᾶς ἐπειδὴ καὶ βούλεσθε δηλωθῆναι ὑμῖν ὅπως δι’·
 ἄγομεν, ἠκούσατε μὲν πάντως ὅπως ἡμᾶς δεσμώτας ἀγομένους ὑπὸ ἑκατοντάρχου καὶ στρατηγῶν καὶ τῶν σὺν αὐτοῖς ατρατιωτῶν καὶ ὑπηρετῶν, ἑ μέ τε καὶ Γάϊον καὶ φαῦστον καὶ Πέτρον Παῦλον, ἐπελθόντες τινὲς τῶν Μαρεωτῶν, ἄκοντας καὶ μηδὲ ἑπομένους, βίᾳ τε καὶ σὐροντες, ἐγὼ δὲ νῦν καὶ Γάϊος καὶ Πέτρος μόνοι, τῶν ἄλλων ἀδελφῶν ἀπορφανισθέντες, ἐν καὶ αὐχμηρῷ τῆς Λιβύης τόπῳ κατακεκλείσμεθα, τριῶν ὁδὸν ἡμερῶν τοῦ Παραιτονίου διεστηκότες.
 καὶ ὑποκαταβάς φησιν·
 “ ἐν δὲ τῇ πόλει καταδεδύκασιν ἀφανῶς ἐπισκεπτόμενοι τοὺς ἀδελφούς, πρεσβύτεροι μὲν Μάξιμος Διόσκορος Λούκιος·
 οἱ γὰρ ἐν τῷ κόσμῳ προφανέστεροι Φαυστῖνος καὶ Ἀκύλας ἐν Αἰγύπτῳ διάκονοι δὲ οἱ μετὰ τοὺς ἐν τῇ νήσῳ ὑπολειφθέντες Φαῦστος Εὐσέβιος Εὐαέβιος, ὃν ἐξ ἀρχῆς ὁ θεὸς ἐνεδυνάμωσεν παρεσκεύασεν τὰς ὑπηρεσίας τῶν ἐν ταῖς φυλακαῖς γενομένων ὁμολογητῶν ἐναγωνίως ἀποπληροῦν καὶ τὰς τῶν σωμάτων περιστολὰς τῶν τελείων καὶ μακαρίων μαρτύρων οὐκ ἀκινδύνως ἐκτελεῖν·
 καὶ γὰρ μέχρι νῦν οὐκ ἀνίησιν ὁ ἡγούμενος τοὺς μὲν ἀναιρῶν, ὡς προεῖπον, ὠμῶς τῶν προσαγομένων, οthers the sword, conquered in the fight and have received their crowns.
 But in thecase οf some,a very long time was not sufficient to show them acceptable to the Lord, as indeed it is still seemingly not sufficient in my case;
 whereforeI have beenput off, until that suitable time that Ηe knows, by Him that saith:
 ῾At an acceptable timeI unto thee, and ina day of salvation didI succour thee.
' For sinceye make inquiriesas to our affairsand desire tobetold how wepassour time, ye have heard οf course how that when we were being led away prisoners by a centurion and duumvirs with their soldiers and servants—I and GaiusandFaustus and Ρeterand Paul— certain of the nomeof Marea up, dragged us by force and carried us away, will and in the face of our refusal to follow them.
 And nowI and GaiusandΡeter only, bereft οfthe other brethren, have been shut up ina lonely, parehed spotin Libya,a three- days journey from Paraetonium.
" Αnd a little further down he says:
“ But inthecity there have concealed themselves, secretly visitinge brethren,of the presbytersMaximus, Dioscorus, emetrius, Lucius.
 For those who are better known the world,Faustinus and Aquila, are wandering bout in Εgypt.
 Αs to the deacons, they who surived those that died in the islandare Faustus, usebius, chaeremon:
 that Εusebius, whom from beginning God strengthened and prepared to nder with all energy the services to the confessors at were in prison, and at no small risk to perform e task of laying out the corpses οf the blessed and erfect martyrs.
 For even to this day the prefect not cease from putting toa cruel death, asI have id before of those who are brought before ἀγομένων, τοὺς δὲ βασάνοις καταξαίνων, τοὺς φυλακαῖς καὶ δεαμοῖς ἐκτήκων προστάσσων τε μηδένα τούτοις προσιέναι καὶ ἀνερευνῶν μή τις φανείη, καὶ ὅμως ὁ θεὸς τῆ προθυμίᾳ καὶ λιπαρίᾳ τῶν ἀδελφῶν διαναπαύει τοὺς πεπιεσμένους.
 καὶ τοσαῦτα μὲν ὁ Διονύσιος.
 ἰατέον δὲ ὡς ὁ μὲν Εὐσέβιος, ὃν διάκονον προσεῖπεν, σμικρὸν ὕστερον ἐπίσκοπος τῆς κατὰ Συρίαν Λαοδικείας καθἱσταται, ὁ δὲ Μάξιμος, ὃν τότε πρεσβύτερον εἴρηκεν, μετ’ αὐτὸν Διονύσιον τὴν λειτουργίαν τῶν κατ’ Ἀλεξάνδρειαν ἀδελφῶν διαδέχεται, Φαῦστος δέ, ὁ σὺν αὐτῷ τηνικάδε διαπρέψας ἐν μέχρι τοῦ καθ’ ὑμᾶς διωγμοῦ φυλαχθείς, γηραιὸς κομιδῇ καὶ πλήρης ἡμερῶν καθ’ ἡμᾶς αὐτοὺς μαρτυρίῳ τὴν κεφαλὴν ἀποτμηθεὶς τελειοῦται.
 Ἀλλὰ τὰ μὲν κατ’ ἐκεῖνο καιροῦ τῷ συμβάντα τοιαῦτα.
 ΧΙΙ.
 κατὰ δὲ τὸν Οὐλπιανοῦ διωγμὸν τρεῖς ἐν Καισαρείᾳ τῆς Παλαιστίνης τῇ κατὰ Χριστὸν διαλάμψαντες θείῳ κατεκοσμήθησαν μαρτυρίῳ, θηρίων βορά·
 τούτων ὁ μὲν Πρίσκος ἐκαλεῖτο, ὁ δὲ Μάλχος, τῷ δὲ τρίτῳ Ἀλέξανδρος ὄνομα ἢν.
 τούτους φασὶν κατ’ ἀγρὸν οἰκοῦντας, πρότερον μὲν ἑαυτοὺς ὡς ἀμελεῖς καὶ ῥᾳθύμους κακίσαι, ὅτι δὴ βραβείων, τοῦ καιροῦ τοῖς πόθου γλιχομένοις οὐρανίου διανέμοντος, ὀλιγωροῖεν αὐτοί, μὴ οὐχὶ προαρπάζοντες τὸν τοῦ μαρτυρίου στέφανον·
 ταύτῃ δὲ βουλευσαμένους, ὁρμῆσαι ἐπὶ τὴν ὁμόσε τε χωρῆσαι ἐπὶ τὸν δικαστὴν καὶ τυχεῖν him, while others he mutilates with tortures, or allows to pine away in imprisonment and chains, giving his οrders that no one is togonear them, and investigating whether any has been found so doing;
 nevertheless God gives some respite to those who are sorely pressed, through the zeal and steadfastness of the brethren.
” Such is the aceount given by Dionysius.
 It should be observed, however,that Εusebius, whom hecallsa deacon, shortly afterwards was appointed bishop of Laodicea in syria;
 and Maximus, of whom he speaks 38a presbyter then, succeeded Dionysius himself in his ministry to the brethren in Alexandria;
 but that Faustus, who along with him was distinguished at that timeforhis confession,was preserved until the perseeution in our day, and, when quite an old man and full οf days, was perfeetedby martyrdom inour οwn time, being beheaded.
 XII.
 so it happenedto Dionysius at that time.
 But during theperseeution of Valerian, of whiehwe are speaking, three persons atCaesareain Palestine, conspicuous for their confession of Christ, were adorned witha divine martyrdom, becoming foodfor wild beasts.
 of these οnewas called Priscus, the second Malchus, and the name of the thirdwas Alexander.
 It is said that these men,who were living in the country, at first reproached themselves for their carelessness and sloth, because instead of hastening to secure the crown of martyrdom, they were proving contemptuous of prizes, though the present opportunity was bestowing them upon sueh as yearned with a heavenly desire.
 But that when they hadtaken counsel thereon, they started for caesarea, appeared before the judge and met the τοῦ προδεδηλωμένου τέλους.
 ἔτι πρὸς τούτοις γύναιόν τι κατὰ τὸν αὐτὸν διωγμὸν ἐν τῇ αὐτῇ πόλει τὸν ὅμοιον ἱστοροῦσιν ἀγῶνα διηθληκέναι·
 τῆς δὲ Μαρκίωνος αὐτὴν αἱρέσεως γεωέσθαι κατέχει λόγος.
 ΧΙΙΙ.
 Ἀλλ’ οὐκ εἰς μακρὸν δουλείαν τὴν παρὰ βαρβάροις ὑπομείναντος Οὐαλεριανοῦ, μοναρχήσας ὁ παῖς σωφρονέστερον τὴν ἀρχὴν διατίθεται, ἀνίησί τε αὐτίκα διὰ προγραμμάτων τὸν καθ’ ἡμῶν διωγμόν, ἐπ’ ἐλευθερίας τοῖς τοῦ λόγου προστάξας, τὰ ἐξ ἔθους ἐπιτελεῖν δι’ ἀντιγραφῆς προστάξας, ἥτις τοῦτον ἔχει τὸν τρόπον·
“ Αὐτοκράτωρ Πούπλιος Λικίνιος Γαλλιῆνος Εὐσεβὴς Εὐτυχὴς Σεβαστὸς Διονυσίῳ καὶ Πίννᾳ καὶ Δημητρίῳ καὶ τοῖς λοιποῖς ἐπισκόποις.
 τὴν εὐεργεσίαν τῆς ἐμῆς δωρεᾶς διὰ παντὸς τοῦ κόσμου ἐκβιβααθῆναι προσέταξα, ὅπως ἀπὸ τῶν τόπων τῶν θρῃσκευσίμων ἀποχωρήσωσιν, καὶ διὰ τοῦτο καὶ ὑμεῖς τῆς ἀντιγραφῆς τῆς ἐμῆς τῷ τύπῳ χρῆσθαι δύνασθε, ὥστε μηδένα ὑμῖν ἐνοχλεῖν.
 καὶ τοῦτο, ὅπερ κατὰ τὸ ἐξὸν δύναται ὑφ’ ὑμῶν ἤδη πρὸ πολλοῦ ὑπ’ ἐμοῦ συγκεχώρηται, καὶ διὰ τοῦτο Αὐρήλιος Κυρίνιος, ὁ τοῦ μεγίστου πράγματος προστατεύων, τὸν τύπον τὸν ὑπ’ ἐμοῦ δοθέντα διαφυλάξει.
” Ταῦτα ἐπὶ τὸ σαφέστερον ἐκ τῆς ‘ Ρωμαίων ἑρμηνευθέντα γλώττης ἐγκείσθω.
 καὶ ἄλλη δὲ τοῦ αὐτοῦ διάταξις φέρεται, ἣν πρὸς ἑτέρους above- mentioned end.
 Moreover they relate besides these,a certain woman during the same persecution and in the same city endured to the enda like conflict.
 But it is recorded that She belonged to the seet of Μarcion.
 XIII.
 But not long afterwards Valerian underwent slavery at the hands of the barbarians, 1 and his succeeding tothe sole power, 2 conducted the governmentwith more prudence, and immediately by means of edicts put an end to the persecution against us.
 Ηe granted free power to those who preSided over the word to perform theiraccustomed duties, by a rescript which runs as follows:
“ The Emperor Caesar Publius Licinius Gallienus Ρius Felix Augustus to Dionysius and Ρinnas and Demetrius and the other bishops.
I have given my order that the benentof my bounty shouldbe published throughoutall the world, to the intent that they should depart from the places οf worship,3 and therefore ye also may use ordinance containedin my rescript, so that none may molest you.
 Αnd this thing which it is within your power to accomplish has long since been conceded by me;
 and therefore Aurelius Quirinius, who is in chargeof the Εxchequer, will observe the ordinance given by me.
” Let this, which for the sake of greater clearness was translated from the Latin, be inserted.
 Αnd there is also extant another of the same emperor’s ordinances, which he addressed to other bishops, ἐπισκόπους πεποίηται, τὰ τῶν καλουμένων κοιμητηρίων ἐπιτρέπων χωρία.
 XIV.
 Ἐν τούτῳ δὲ τῆς μὲν‘ Ρωμαίων ἐκκλησίας εἰς ἔτι τότε καθηγεῖτο Ξύστος, τῆς δ’ ἐπ’ Ἀντιοχείας μετὰ Φάβιον Δημητριανός, Φιρμιλιανὸς δὲ Καισαρείας τῆς Καππαδοκῶν, καὶ ἐπὶ τούτοις τῶν κατὰ Πόντον ἐκκλησιῶν Γρηγόριος καὶ ὁ τούτου ἀδελφὸς Ἀθηνόδωρος, Ὠριγένους γνώριμοι·
 δ’ ἐπὶ Παλαιστίνης Καισαρείας, Θεοκτίστου μεταλλάξαωτος, διαδέχεται τὴν ἐπισκοπὴν Δόμνος, βραχεῖ δὲ χρόνῳ τούτου διαγενομένου, Θεότεκνος, ὁ καθ’ ἡμᾶς, διάδοχος καθίσταται·
 τῆς δ’ Ὠριγένους διατριβῆς καὶ οὗτος ἦν.
 ἀλλὰ καὶ ἐν Ἱεροσολύμοις ἀναπαυσαμένου Μαζαβάνου, θρόνον Ὑμέναιος, ὁ καὶ αὐτὸς ἐπὶ πλείστοις τοῖς καθ’ ἡμᾶς διαπρέψας ἔτεσιν, διεδέξατο.
 XV.
 Κατὰ τούτους εἰρήνης ἁπανταχοῦ τῶν ἐκκλησιῶν οὔσης, ἐν Καισαρείᾳ τῆς τετιμημένω, Μαρῖνος τῶν ἐν στρατείαις ἀξιώμασι τετιμημένων γένει τε καὶ πλούτῳ περιφανὴς ἀνήρ, διὰ τὴν Χριστοῦ μαρτυρίαν τὴν κεφαλὴν ἀποτέμνεται, τοιᾶσδε ἕνεκεν αἰτίας.
 τιμή τίς ἐστι παρὰ Ῥωμαίοις τὸ κλῆμα, οὗ τοὺς τυχόντας φασὶν ἑκατοντάρχους γίνεσθαι.
 τόπου σχοΛάζοντος, ἐπὶ τοῦτο προκοπῆς τὸν Μαρῖνον ἡ τοῦ βαθμοῦ τάξις ἐκάλει, ἤδη τε μέλλοντα τῆς τιμῆς ἔχεσθαι παρελθὼν ἄλλος πρὸ τοῦ βήματος, μὴ ἐξεῖναι μὲν ἐκείνῳ τῆς Ῥωμαίων μετέχειν ἀξίας κατὰ τοὺς νόμους, χριστιανῷ γε ὄντι καὶ τοῖς βασιλεῦσι μὴ θύοντι, κατηγόρει, αὐτῷ δ’ ἐπιβάλλειν τὸν κλῆρον·
 ἐφ’ ᾧ κινηθέντα τὸν δικαστὴν Ἀχαιὸς οὗτος ἦν) giving them permission to recover the sites οf the cemeteries, as they are called.
 XIV.
 Αt that time Xystus was still ruling the church of the Romans, Demetrian, who came after Fabius, the chureh at Αntioch, and Firmilian at caesarea in Cappadocia;
 and moreover Gregory and his brother Athenodore were ruling thechurchesof Ρontus, pupils of origen.
 Αs to Caesarea in Palestine, on thedeathof Theoctistus, Domnus succeededto the episcopate, but afterhe had continued in officeashort time Theotecnus, our contemporary, was appointedto succeed him.
 Ηe also was of the school of Origen.
 But at Jerusalem, when Mazabanes had entered intohis rest,Ηymenaeus succeeded to the throne, the samewho was distinguished for very many years in our day.
 XV.
 In the timeofthose persons, when the churches everywhere were at peace,a man at caesareainΡalestine called Μarinus, honoured by high rank in the army and distinguished besides by birth and wealth, was beheaded for his testimony to christ, on the following account.
 There is a certain mark of honouramongthe Romans,the vine- switch,and those that obtainit become,it is said, centurions.
Α post was vacant, and accordingto the order of promotion Marinus was being called to this advancement.
 Indeed he was on the point ofreceivingthe honour, when another stepped forward before the tribunal, and stated thatinaccordance with the ancientlaws Marinus couldnot share in the rank that belongedto Romans, since he was a Christian and did not sacrifice to the emperors;
 but that the οffice fell to himself.
 Αnd it is said that the( his namewas Αchaeus)was moved thereat, and first πρῶτον μὲν ἐρέσθαι ποίας ὁ Μαρῖνος εἴη γνώμης, ὡς δ’ ὁμολογοῦντα χριστιανὸν ἐπιμόνως ἑώρα, τριῶν ὡρῶν ἐπιδοῦναι αὐτῷ εἰς ἐπίσκεψιν διάστημα.
 Ἐκτὸς δῆτα γενόμενον αὐτὸν τοῦ δικαστηρίου Θεότεκνος ὁ τῇδε ἐπίσκοπος ἀφέλκει, προσελθὼν δι’ ὁμιλίας, καὶ τῆς χειρὸς λαβὼν ἐπὶ τὴν ἐκκλησίαν προάγει, εἴσω τε πρὸς αὐτῷ στήσας τῷ ἁγιάσματι, μικρόν τι παραναστείλας αὐτοῦ τῆς χλαμύδος καὶ τὸ προσηρτημένον αὐτῷ ξίφος ἐπιδείξας ἅμα τε ἀντιπαρατίθησιν προσαγαγὼν αὐτῷ τὴν τῶν θείων εὐαγγελίων γραφήν, κελεύσας τῶν δυεῖν ἑλέσθαι τὸ κατὰ γνώμην.
 Ὡς δ’ ἀμελλητὶ τὴν δεξιὰν προτείνας τὴν θείαν γραφήν,“ ἔχου τοίνυν, ἔχου,” πρὸς αὐτὸν ὁ Θεότεκνος,“ τοῦ θεοῦ, καὶ τύχοις ὧν εἵλου, πρὸς αὐτοῦ δυναμούμενος, καὶ βάδιζε μετ’ εἰρήνης.
 ” εὐθὺς ἐκεῖθεν ἐπανελθόντα αὐτὸν κῆρυξ ἐβόα καλῶν πρὸ τοῦ δικαστηρίου·
 καὶ γὰρ ἤδη τὰ τῆς προθεσμίας τοῦ χρόνου πεπλήρωτο·
 καὶ δὴ παραστὰς τῷ δικαστῇ καὶ μείζονα τῆς πίστεως τὴν προθυμίαν ἐπιδείξας, εὐθὺς ὡς εἶχεν, ἀπαχθεὶς τὴν ἐπὶ θανάτῳ, τελειοῦται.
 XVI.
 Ἔνθα καὶ Ἀστύριος ἐπὶ παρρησίᾳ μνημονεύεται, ἀνὴρ τῶν ἐπὶ ‘ Ρώμης συγκλητικῶν γενόμενος βασιλεῦσίν τε καὶ πᾶσι γνώριμος εὐγενείας τε ἕνεκα καὶ περιουσίας·
 παρὼν τελειουμένῳ τῷ μάρτυρι, τὸν ὦμον ὑποθείς, ἐπὶ λαμπρᾶς καὶ πολυτελοῦς ἐσθῆτος ἄρας τὸ σκῆνος ἐπιφέρεται, περιστείλας τε εὖ μάλα πλουσίως, τῆ προσηκούσῃ ταφῇ παραδίδωσιν.
 of all asked what views Marinus held;
 and then, When he saw that he was stedfast in confessing himeselfa Christian, gave hima space of three hoursfor consideration.
 When he came outside the court Theotecnus,the bishop there, approaehed and drew him aside in conversation, and taking him by the hand led him forward to the church.
 Οnce inside, he placedhim close to the altar1 itself,and rairing his cloaka little, pointed to the sword with which he was girded;
 at the sametime he broughtand placed before him the book ofthe divine Gospels, and bade him choose which of the two he wished.
 Without hesitation he stretched forth his right hand and took the divine book.
“ Ηold fast then,” said Theotecnusto him,“ hold fast to God;
 and, strengthened by Him, mayest thou obtain that thou hast chosen.
 Go in peace.
” As hewasthence immediatelyaherald cried aloud, summoning him before the court of justice.
 For the appointed time was now over Standing before the judge he displayed still greater zeal for the faith;
 and straightway, even ashe was, was led away to death, and sowas perfected.
 XVI.
 In that place Astyrius also is commemorated for the boldness whieh is dear to God.
 Ηe wasamember ofthe Roman Senate,a favouriteof emperors,and well known to all both for birth and wealth.
 Ηe was present with the martyr when he was being perfected, and raising the corpse2 upon his shoulder he placed it upona splendidandcostly robe, and laying it out with great magnificence gave it a fitting burial.
 Τούτου μυρία μὲν καὶ ἄλλα μνημονεύουσιν οἱ τἀνδρὸς καὶ εἰς ἡμᾶς διαμείναντες γνώριμοι, ἀτὰρ καὶ παραδόξου τοιούτου.
 XVII.
 ἐπὶ τῆς Φιλίππου1 Καισαρείας, ἢν Πανεάδα Φοίνικες προααγορεύουσιν, φασὶ παρὰ ταῖς αὐτόθι δεικνυμέναις ἐν ταῖς ὑπωρείαις τοῦ καλουμένου Πανείου ὄρους πηγαῖς, ἐξ ὧν καὶ τὸν Ἰορδάνην προχεῖσθαι, κατά τινα ἑορτῆς ἡμέραν αφάγιόν τι καταβάλλεαθαι καὶ τοῦτο τῇ τοῦ δαίμονος δυνάμει ἀφανὲς γίνεαθαι παραδόξως θαῦμά τε εἶναι περιβόητον τοῖς παροῦσι τὸ γινόμενον.
 παρόντα δ᾿ οὗν ποτε τοῖς πραττομένοις τὸν Ἀστύριον καὶ τὸ πρᾶγμα καταπεπληγμένους ἰδόντα τοὺς πολλούς, οἰκτεῖραι τῆς πλάνης, κἄπειτα ἀνανεύσαντα εἰς οὐρανόν, ἱκετεωαι διὰ Χριατοῦ τὸν ἐπὶ πάντων θεὸν τὸ λαοπλάνον δαιμόνιον ἐλέγξαι καὶ παῦσαι τῆς τῶν ἀνθρώπων ἀπάτης.
 ταῦτα δέ φασιν εὐξαμένου, ἀθρόως τὸ ἱερεῖον ἐπιπολάσαι ταῖς πηγαῖς οὕτω τε αὐτοῖς τὸ παράδοξον οἴχεσθαι, μηδενὸς μηκέτι θαύματος περὶ τὸν τόπον γινομένου.
 XVIII.
 ἈΛλ᾿ ἐπειδὴ τῆσδε τῆς πόλεως εἰς μνήμην ἐλήλυθα, οὐκ ἄξιον ἡγοῦμαι παρελθεῖν διήγησιν καὶ τοῖς μεθ’ ἡμᾶς μνημονεύεσθαι ἀξίαν.
 τὴν γὰρ αἱμορροοῦσαν, ἢν ἐκ τῶν ἱερῶν εὐαγγελίων πρὸς τοῦ αωτἠρος ἡμῶν τοῦ πάθους ἀπαλλαγὴν εὕρασθαι μεμαθήκαμεν, ἐνθένδε ἔλεγον ὁρμᾶσθαι τόν τε οἶκον αὐτῆς ἐπὶ τῆς πόλεως δείκνυαθαι καὶ τῆς ὑπὸ τοῦ αωτἠρος εἰς αὐτὴν εὐεργεαίας θαυαστὰ τρόπαια παραμένειν.
 ἑστάναι γὰρ ἐφ’ ὑψηλοῦ λίθου πρὸς μὲν ταῖς πύλαις τοῦ αὐτῆς οἴκου γυναικὸς ἐκτύπωμα χάλκεον, ἐπὶ γόνυ κεκλιμένον καὶ τεταμέναις ἐπὶ τὸ πρόαθεν ταῖςΑ great many otherfacts are mentioned aboutthismanby his friends, who have survived to οur day, and also the following wonderful event.
 XVII.
 Αt caesarea Philippit, which Phoenicians call Paneas, is said that ona certain festivala victim is thrown down among the springs that are shown there, on the slopes of the mountain called Paneion, from which the Jordan takes its source;
 and that it becomes invisible in some miraculous way through the power,a circumstance,they say, that is lookeduponby those presentasa far- famed marvel.
 Νow story goes that once Astyriuswas there when thiswasbeing done,and when he saw the multitude stuck with amazement at the affair, in pityfor their error he looked up toward heaven and besought God who is over all, through Christ, to confound the demon who was causing the people to err, and put an end to the deception of these men.
 Αnd it is said that, when hehad thus prayed, of a sudden the sacrifice floated on the surface οf the springs;
 and thus their miracle came to an end, and no further marvel ever took place in connexion with that spot.
 XVIII.
 But sinceI have cometomention this city.
I do not thinkit right to omita story thatisworthy to be recordedalso for those that come after us.
 For they say that she whohad an issueof blood,and who, as we leam from the sacred Gospels, found at the hands of our Sariour relief from her affliction, came from this place, and that her house was pointed out in the city, and that marvellous memorials of the good deed, which the Saviour wrought upon her, still remained.
 For they said that there stoodona lofty stone at the gatesof her housea brazen figure in reliefa woman, bending on her knee and stretching χερσὶν ἱκετευούσῃ ἐοικός, τούτου δὲ ἄντικρυς ἄλλο τῆς αὐτῆς ὕλης, ἀνδρὸς ὄρθιον σχῆμα, διπλοΐδα κοαμίως περιβεβλημένον καὶ τὴν χεῖρα τῆ γυναικὶ προτεῖνον, οὗ παρὰ τοῖς ποσὶν ἐπὶ τῆς στήλης αὐτῆς ξένον τι βοτάνης εἶδος φύειν,δ’ μέχρι τοῦ κρασπέδου τῆς τοῦ χαλκοῦ διπλοΐδος ἀνιόν, ἀλεξιφάρμακόν τι παντοίων νοσημάτων τυγχάνειν.
 τοῦτον τὸν ἀνδριάντα εἰκόνα τοῦ Ιησοῦ φέρειν ἔλεγον, ἔμενεν δὲ καὶ εἰς ἡμᾶς, ὡς καὶ ὄφει παραλαβεῖν ἐπιδημήσαντας αὐτοὺς τῇ πόλει.
 καὶ θαυμαστὸν οὐδὲν τοὺς πάλαι ἐξ ἐθνῶν εὐεργετηθέντας πρὸς τοῦ σωτῆρος ἡμῶν ταῦτα πεποιηκέναι, ὅτε καὶ τῶν ἀποστόλων αὐτοῦ τὰς εἰκόνας Παύλου καὶ Πέτρου καὶ αὐτοῦ δὴ τοῦ χριστοῦ διὰ χρωμάτων ἐν γραφαῖς σῳζομένας ἱστορήσαμεν, ὡς εἰκός, τῶν παλαιῶν ἀπαραφυλάκτως οἷα σωτῆρας ἐθνικῇ συνηθείᾳ παρ’ ἑαυτοῖς τοῦτον τιμᾶν εἰωθότων τὸν τρόπον.
 XIX.
 Τὸν γὰρ Ἰακώβου θρόνον, τοῦ πρώτου τῆς Ἱεροσολύμων ἐκκλησίας τὴν ἐπισκοπὴν πρὸς τοῦ σωτῆρος καὶ τῶν ἀποστόλων ὑποδεξαμένου, ὃν καὶ ἀδελφὸν τοῦ χριστοῦ χρηματίσαι οἱ θεῖοι λόγοι περιέχουσιν, εἰς δεῦρο πεφυλαγμένον οἱ τῇδε κατὰ διαδοχὴν περιέποντες ἀδελφοὶ σαφῶς τοῖς πᾶσιν ἐπιδείκνυνται οἷον περὶ τοὺς ἁγίους ἄνδρας τοῦ θεοφιλοῦς ἕνεκεν οἵ τε πάλαι καὶ οἱ εἰς ἡμᾶς ἔσῳζόν τε καὶ ἀποσῴζουσι σέβας.
 ταῦτα μὲν ταύτῃ.
 XX.
 Ὅ γε μὴν Διονύσιος πρὸς ταῖς δηλωθείσαις ἐπιστολαῖς αὐτοῦ ἔτι καὶ τὰς φερομένας ἑορταστικὰς τὸ τηνικαῦτα συντάττει, πανηγυρικωτέρους forth her hands likea suppliant, while opposite to this there was another of the same material, an upright figure ofa man, clothed in comely fashion in a double cloak and stretching out his hand to the woman;
 at his feet on the monument itselfa strange species of herb was growing, which climbed up tothe border of the double cloak of brass, and actedas an antidote to all kinds of diseases.
 This statue, they said, bore the likeness οf Jesus.
 Αnd it was in existence even to our day,so that we saw it with our own eyes when we stayed in the city.
 Αnd there is nothing wonderful in the fact thatthose heathen, who long ago had good deeds done to them by our saviour, should havemade these objects, since wesaw the likenessesofΗis apostles also, of Ρauland Ρeter, and indeed of Christ Himself, preserved in pictures painted in colours.
 Αnd this is what we should expect, for the ancients were wont, according totheir pagan habit, to honourthemas saviours, without reservation, in this fashion.
 XIX.
 Νow the throne of James, who was the first to receive from the Saviour and the apostles the episcopate of the churchat Jerusalem,who also,as the divine books show, was calledabrother of Christ,has been preserved to this day;
 and by the honour that the brethrenin suecession therepayto it, they show cleariy to all the reverenee in whieh the holy men were and still are held by the men οf old time and those of our day, because of the love shown them by God.
 so much for these matters.
 XX.
 But to resume.
 Dionysius, in addition to the letters of his that were mentioned, composed at that time also the festal letters which are still extant, in which he gives utterance to words specially suited to ἐν αὐταῖς περὶ τῆς τοῦ πάσχα ἑορτῆς ἀνακινῶν λόγους.
 τούτων τὴν μὲν Θλαυΐῳ προσφωνεῖ, τὴν δὲ Δομετίῳ καὶ Διδύμῳ, ἐν ἦ καὶ κανόνα ἐκτίθεται ὀκταετηρίδος, ὅτι μὴ ἄλλοτε ἢ μετὰ τὴν ἐαρινὴν ἰσημερίαν προσήκοι τὴν τοῦ πάσχα ἑορτὴν ἐπιτελεῖν, παριστάμενος·
 πρὸς ταύταις καὶ ὤην τοῖς κατ’ Ἀλεξάνδρειαν συμπρεσβυτέροις ἐπιστολὴν διαχαράττει ἑτέροις τε ὁμοῦ διαφόρως, καὶ ταύτας ἔτι τοῦ διωγμοῦ συνεστῶτος.
 ΧΧΙ.
 Ἐπιλαβούσης δὲ ὅσον οὔπω τῆς εἰρήνης, ἐπάνεισι μὲν εἰς τὴν Ἀλεξάνδρειαν, πάλινδ’ ἐνταῦθα στάσεως καὶ πολέμου συστάντος, ὡς οὐχ οἷόν τε ἢν αὐτῷ τοὺς κατὰ τὴν πόλιν ἅπαντας ἀδελφούς, εἰς ἑκάτερον τῆς στάσεως μέρος διῃρημένους, ἐπισκοπεῖν, αὖθις ἐν τῆ τοῦ πάσχα ἑορτῇ, ὥσπερ τις ὑπερόριος, ἐξ αὐτῆς τῆς διὰ γραμμάτων αὐτοῖς ὡμίλει.
 καὶ Ἱέρακι δὲ μετὰ ταῦτα τῶν κατ’ Αἴγυπτον ἐπισκόπῳ ἑτέραν ἑορταστικὴν ἐπιστολὴν γράφων, τῆς κατ’ αὐτὸν τῶν Ἀλεξανδρέων στάσεως μνημονεύει διὰ τούτων·
“ Ἐμοὶ δέ, τί θαυμαστὸν εἰ πρὸς τοὺς πορρωτέρω παροικοῦντας χαλεπὸν τὸ κάν δι’ ἐπιστολῶν ὁμιλεῖν, ὅτε καὶ τὸ πρὸς ἐμαυτὸν αὐτῷ μοι διαλέγεσθαι καὶ τῇ ἰδίᾳ ψυχῇ συμβουλεύεσθαι καθέστηκεν ἄπορον;
 πρὸς γοῦν τὰ ἐμαυτοῦ σπλάγχνα, τοὺς ὁμοσκήνους καὶ συμψύχους ἀδελφοὺς καὶ τῆς αὐτῆς πολίτας ἐκκλησίας, ἐπιστολιμαίων δέομαι γραμμάτων, καὶ ταῦθ’ ὅπως διαπεμψαίμην, φαίνεται.
 ῥᾷον γὰρ ἄν τις οὐχ ὅπως τὴν ὑπερορίαν, ἀλλὰ καὶ ἀπ’ ἀνατολῶν ἐπὶ δυσμὰςa solemn occasion with reference to the festivalofthe Ρascha.
 Of these he addressedone to Flavius, another to Domitius and Didymus in which also he sets fortha canon based ona cycle of eight years, proving that it is not proper to celebrate the festival of the Ρascha at any other time than after the vernal equinox.
 In addition to these he penned also another letter to his fellow- presbyters at Αlexandria, and others at the same time in different places.
 Αnd these he wrotewhile the persecutionwas still proceeding.
 XXI.
 Ρeace had all but arrived, when he returned to Αlexandria.
 But when faction and war broke outthere once more, since it was not possible for him to discharge his oversight over all the brethrenin the city, separated as they were into one or other part οf the faction,he again at the festivalofthe Ρaseha communicated withthemby letter,as if he were someone ina foreign country, from Alexandria itself.
 Αnd to Ηierax, after this,a bishop of thosein Εgypt he writes another festal letter, mentioning in the following terms the faction prevailing among the Αlexandrians in his day:
“ But asforme, what wonderisit ifIfind it difficulttocommunicate even by letterwith those whoat some distance, seeing that it has become impossible even for myself to coverse with myself, or to take counsel with my own soul? Certainly,I have needto write by letter to my very heart, that is, the brethren that are of the same householdandmind with me, and citizensof the same church;
 and there seems no possible way of getting this correspondence through.
 For it were easier fora man to pass, I do not say toa foreign country, but even from East to περαιωθείη, ἢ τὴν Ἀλεξάνδρειαν ἀπ’ αὐτῆς τῆς Ἀλεξανδρείας ἐπέλθοι.
 τῆς γὰρ ἐρήμου τῆς πολλῆς καὶ ἀτριβοῦς ἐκείνης ἢν ἐν δυσὶν γενεαῖς διώδευσεν ὁ Ἰσραήλ, ἄπειρος μᾶλλον καὶ ἄβατός ἐστιν ἡ μεσαιτάτη τῆς πόλεως ὁδός·
 καὶ τῆς θαλάσσης ἢν ἐκεῖνοι ῥαγεῖσαν καὶ διατειχισθεῖσαν ἔσχον ἱππήλατον καὶ ἐν τῆ λεωφόρῳ κατεποντίσθησαν Αἰγύπτιοι, οἱ γαληνοὶ καὶ ἀκύμαντοι λιμένες γεγόνασιν εἰκών, πολλάκις φανέντες ἀπὸ τῶν ἐν αὐτοῖς φόνων οἷον ἐρυθρὰ θάλασσα·
 ὁ δ᾿ ἐπιρρέων ποταμὸς τὴν πόλιν ποτὲ μὲν ἐρήμου τῆς ἀνύδρου ξηρότερος ὤφθη καὶ μᾶλλον αὐχμώδης ἐκείνης ἣν διαπορευόμενος ὁ Ἰσραὴλ οὕτως ἐδίψησεν, ὡς Μωσῆ μὲν καταβοᾶν, ῥυῆναι δ᾿ αὐτοῖς παρὰ τοῦ θαυμάσια ποιοῦντος μόνου ἐκ πέτρας ἀκροτόμου πότον·
 ποτὲ δὲ τοσοῦτος ἐπλήμμυρεν ὡς πᾶσαν τὴν περίχωρον τάς τε ὁδοὺς καὶ τοὺς ἀγροὺς ἐπικλύσαντα, τῆς ἐπὶ Νῶε γενομένης τοῦ ὕδατος φορᾶς ἐπαγαγεῖν ἀπειλήν·
 ἀεὶ δὲ αἵματι καὶ φόνοις καὶ καταποντισμοῖς κάτεισιν μεμιασμένος, οἷος ὑπὸ Μωσῆ γέγονεν τῷ Φαραώ, μεταβαλὼν εἰς αἷμα καὶ ἀποξέσας.
 καὶ ποῖον γένοιτ᾿ ἂν τοῦ πάντα καθαίροντος ὕδατος ὕδωρ ἄλλο καθάρσιον;
 πῶς ἂν ὁ πολὺς καὶ ἀπέραντος ἀνθρώποις ὠκεανὸς ἐπιχυθεὶς τὴν πικρὰν ταύτην ἀποσμήξαι θάλασσαν;
 ἢ πῶς ἂν ὁ μέγας ποταμός, ὁ ἐκπορευόμενος ἐξ Ἐδέμ, τὰς τέσσαρας ἀρχὰς εἰς ἃς ἀφορίζεται, μετοχετεύσας εἰς μίαν τοῦ Γηών, ἀποπλύναι τὸν λύθρον;
 ἢ πότε ὁ τεθολωμένος ὑπὸ τῶν πονηρῶν πανταχόθεν ἀναθυμιάσεων ἀὴρ εἰλικρινὴς γένοιτο;
 τοιοῦτοι γὰρ ἀπὸ τῆς γῆς ἀτμοὶ καὶ ἀπὸ θαλάσσης ἄνεμοι ποταμῶν τε West, than to traverse Alexandria from Αlexandria itself.
 For the street that runs through the very centre οf the city is harder to traverse and more impassable than that great and trackless desert through whieh Israel journeyed for two generations.
 Αnd our calm and waveless harbours have become an image of the sea, which, split up and made intoa wallon either side, they had fora carriage road, and in the highway1 the Egyptians were drowned;
 and from the murders that take place in them they oftentimes appeared likea Red Sea.
 Αnd the river that flows on past the city at one time appeared drier thanthe waterless desert, and more arid than that in whose crossing Israel so thirsted that Moses cried out,and there flowed to them, from Ηimwho alone doeth wonders, drink out of the rockof flint.
 Αt another time it overflowed to suchan extent that it submergedthe whole neighbourhood, both the roads andthe fields, threatening to bring upon us the rush of waters that took place in the daysof Νoah.
 Αnd always its course is defiled with blood and murders and drownings, such as it beeame for Pharaoh by thehand οf Moses, when itwas turned to blood and stank.
 Αnd What οther water could there be to cleanse the water that cleansesall things?Ηow could the great ocean thatmen cannot pass, if it were poured upon it, purge this horrid sea? Or how could the great river that goeth out of Εden, if it were to divert the four heads, into which it is parted, into one, the Gihon, wash away the gore? Or when might the air, made foul by the vile exhalations on all sides, become pure? For such are the vapours that are given off from the land, winds from the sea, breezes ἁδραὶ καὶ λιμένων ἀνιμήσεις ἀποπνέουσιν, ὡς σηπομένων ἐν πᾶσι τοῖς ὑποκειμένοις στοιχείοις νεκρῶν ἰχῶρας εἶναι τὰς δρόσους.
 εἶτα θαυμάζουσιν καὶ διαποροῦσιν, πόθεν οἱ συνεχεῖς λοιμοί, πόθεν αἱ χαλεπαὶ νόσοι, πόθεν αἱ παντοδαπαὶ φθοραί, πόθεν ὁ ποικίλος καὶ πολὺς τῶν ἀνθρώπων ὄλεθρος, διὰ τί μηκέτι τοσοῦτο πλῆθος οἰκητόρων ἡ μεγίστη πόλις ἐν αὐτῇ φέρει, ἀπὸ νηπίων ἀρξαμένη παίδων μέχρι τῶν εἰς ἄκρον γεγηρακότων, δάους ὠμογέροντας οὓς ἐκάλει, πρότερον ὄντας ἔτρεφεν·
 ἀλλ’ οἱ τεσσαρακοντοῦται καὶ μέχρι τῶν ἑβδομήκοντα ἐτῶν τοσοῦτον πλέονες τότε, ὥστε μὴ συμπληροῦσθαι νῦν τὸν ἀριθμὸν αὐτῶν, προσεγγραφέντων καὶ συγκαταλεγέντων εἰς τὸ δημόσιον τῶν ἀπὸ τεσσαρεσκαίδεκα ἐτῶν μέχρι τῶν ὀγδοήκοντα, καὶ γεγόνασιν οἷον ἡλικιῶται τῶν πάλαι γεραιτάτων οἱ ὄφει νεώτατοι.
 καὶ οὕτω μειούμενον ἀεὶ καὶ δαπανώμενον ὁρῶντες τὸ ἐπὶ γῆς ἀνθρώπων γένος, οὐ τρέμουσιν, αὐξομένου καὶ προκόπτοντος τοῦ παντελοῦς αὐτῶν ἀφανισμοῦ.
” XXII.
 Μετὰ ταῦτα λοιμικῆς τὸν πόλεμον διαλαβούσης νόσου τῆς τε ἑορτῆς πληαιαξούαης, αὖθις διὰ γραφῆς τοῖς ἀδελφοῖς ὁμιλεῖ, τὰ τῆς συμφορᾶς ἐπισημαινόμενος μαινόμενος πάθη διὰ τούτων·
 “ Τοῖς μὲν ἄλλοις ἀνθρώποις οὐκ ἄν δόξειεν καιρὸς ἑορτῆς εἶναι τὰ παρόντα, οὐδὲ ἔστιν αὐτοῖς οὔτε οὗτος οὔτε τις ἕτερος, οὐχ ὅπως τῶν ἐπιλύπων, ἀλλ᾿ οὐδ’ εἴ τις περιχαρής, ὃν οἰηθεῖεν μάλιστα.
 νῦν μέν γε θρῆνοι πάντα, καὶ πενθοῦσιν πάντες, from the rivers and mists from the harbours, that the dews are discharges from corpses rotting in all their constituent elements.
 Yet men marvel and are at a loss as to wheuce comethe constant plagues,1 whencethe grievous diseases, whence the various forms of death, whence the manifold and great human mortality,why this greatest of cities no longer contains within it so greatamultitude of inhabitants, from infant children up to those extremely advanced in years, as it used formerly to support of those known as men οf green old age! Νay, those of forty years old and up to seventy were then so numerous, that the full total of their number is not to be reached now, when those from fourteen to eighty years have been registered and reckoned together for the public foodration2;
 and the youngest in appearance have become of equal age, so to speak, with those who long ago were the oldest.
3 Αnd though the human race upon earth is thus ever diminishing and consuming away before their eyes, they do not tremble, as its total disappearance draws nearer and nearer.
” XXII.
 After this, when thewarwas followed bya pestilential disease, and the feastwas at hand, he communicated once more by letterwiththe brethren, indicating the sufferings of the calamity,as follows:
‟ To othermen the presentwould not seemto beatime for festival, nor for them is this or any οther time of such a nature;
I speak notoftimes of mourning, but even ofany time that mightbe thought especially joyful.
 Νow indeed all is lamentation, and all men mourn, and wailings resound καὶ τεθνηκότων οἰμωγαὶ τὴν πόλιν διὰ τὸ πλῆθος τῶν τεθνηκότων καὶ τῶν ἀποθνῃσκόντων ὁσημέραι·
 ὡς γὰρ ἐπὶ τῶν πρωτοτόκων τῶν Αἰγυπτίων γέγραπταὶ, οὕτως καὶ νῦν ἐγενήθη κραυγὴ μεγάλη·
 οὐ γὰρ ἔστιν οἰκία, ἐν ἦ οὐκ ἔστιν ἐν αὐτῇ τεθνηκώς, καὶ ὄφελόν γε εἷς.
 ‟ Πόλλα μὲν γὰρ καὶ δεινὰ καὶ τὰ πρὸ τούτου συμβεβηκότα·
 πρῶτον μὲν ἡμᾶς ἤλασαν, καὶ μόνοι πρὸς ἁπάντων διωκόμενοι καὶ θανατούμενοι ἑωρτάσαμεν καὶ τότε, καὶ πᾶς ὁ τῆς καθ’ ἕκαστον θλίψεως τόπος πανηγυρικὸν ἡμῖν γέγονε χωρίον, ἀγρὸς ἐρημία ναῦς πανδοχεῖον δεσμωτήριον, φαιδροτάτην δὲ πασῶν ἤγαγον ἑορτὴν οἱ τέλειοι μάρτυρες, εὐωχηθέντες ἐν οὐρανῷ·
 μετὰ δὲ ταῦτα πόλεμος καὶ λιμὸς ἐπέλαβεν, ἃ τοῖς ἔθνεσι συνδιηνέγκαμεν, μόνοι μὲν ὑποστάντες ὅσα ἡμῖν ἐλυμήναντο, παραπολαύσαντες δὲ καὶ ὧν ἀλλήλους εἰργάσαντό τε καὶ πεπόνθασιν, καὶ τῇ Χριστοῦ πάλιν ἐνηυφράνθημεν εἰρήνῃ, ἢν μόνοις ἡμῖν δέδωκεν·
 βραχυτάτης δὲ ἡμῶν τε καὶ αὐτῶν τυχόντων ἀναπνοῆς, ἐπικατέσκηψεν ἡ νόσος αὕτη, πρᾶγμα φόβου τε παντὸς φοβερώτερον ἐκείνοις καὶ συμφορᾶς ἥστινος οὖν σχετλιώτερον καὶ ὡς ἴδιός τις αὐτῶν ἀπήγγειλεν συγγραφεύς, πρᾶγμα δὴ τῶν πάντων ἐλπίδος κρεῖσσον γενόμενον,’ ἡμῖν δὲ οὐ τοιοῦτο μέν, γυμνάσιον δὲ καὶ δοκίμιον οὐδενὸς τῶν ἄλλων ἔλαττον.
 ἀπέσχετο μὲν γὰρ οὐδὲ ἡμῶν, πολλὴ δὲ ἐξῆλθεν εἰς τὰ ἔθνη.
 ” Τούτοις ἑξῆς ἐπιφέρει λέγων·
 ‟ οἱ γοῦν πλεῖστοι τῶν ἀδελφῶν ἡμῶν δι’ ὑπερβάλλουσαν ἀγάπην καὶ φιλαδελφίαν ἀφειδοῦντες ἑαυτῶν καὶ ἀλλήλων throughoutthe city because of the number of dead and of those that are dying day by day.
 For as as it is written ofthe firstborn of the Egyptians,so also itis now:
‘ There wasa great cry;
 for there is not a house where there is not one dead’:
 and would indeed that it were but one!“ For ofatruth many and terriblewere the things also that happenedtous before this.
 Αt first theydrove us out, and alonewe kept our festival at that timealso, persecuted and put to death by all, and every single sport where we were afflicted became for us a place of festiveassembly, field, desert, ship, inn, prison;
 but the brightest of all festivals was kept by the perfect martyrs, when they feasted in heaven.
 Αnd, after that,war and famine came upon us, which we bore along with the heathen.
 Alone we endured all the injuries theyinflicted upon us, while wehadthe benefit besides of what they wrought upon each other and what they suffered:
 and we found our joy once more in thepeaceof Christ, which Ηe has given to us alone.
 But when the briefest breathing- space had been granted us and them, there descended upon us this disease,a thing that is tothemmore fearful than any other object of fear, more cruel than any calamity whatsoever, and,as one of their own writers declared,‘ the only thing of all that proved worse than what was expected.’
 Yet tousit was notso, but, less thanthe other misfortunes,a source of discipline and testing.
 For indeed it did not leaveus untouched, although it attacked the heathen with great strength.
” Following these remarks he adds as follows:
“ The most, at all events, of our brethren in their exceeding love and affection for the brotherhood were unsparing ἐχόμενοι, ἐπισκοποῦντες ἀφυλάκτως τοὺς νοσοῦντας, λιπαρῶς ὑπηρετούμενοι, θεραπεύοντες ἐν Χριστῷ, συναπηλλάττοντο ἐκείνοις ἀσμενέστατα, τοῦ παρ’ ἑτέρων ἀναπιμπλάμενοι πάθους καὶ τὴν νόσον ἐφ’ ἑαυτοὺς ἕλκοντες ἀπὸ τῶν πλησίον καὶ ἑκόντες ἀναμασσόμενοι τὰς ἀλγηδόνας.
 καὶ πολλοὶ νοσοκομήσαντες καὶ ῥώσαντες ἑτέρους, ἐτελεύτησαν αὐτοί, τὸν ἐκείνων θάνατον εἰς ἑαυτοὺς μεταστησάμενοι καὶ τὸ δημῶδες ῥῆμα, μόνης ἀεὶ δοκοῦν φιλοφροσύνης ἔχεσθαι, ἔργῳ δὴ τότε πληροῦντες, ἀπιόντες αὐτῶν περίψημα.
 ᾿ οἱ γοῦν ἄριστοι τῶν παρ’ ἡμῖν ἀδελφῶν τοῦτον τὸν τρόπον ἐξεχώρησαν τοῦ βίου, πρεσβύτεροί τέ τινες καὶ διάκονοι καὶ τῶν ἀπὸ τοῦ λαοῦ, λίαν ἐπαινούμενοι, ὡς καὶ τοῦ θανάτου τοῦτο τὸ εἶδος, διὰ πολλὴν εὐσέβειαν καὶ πίστιν ἰσχυρὰν γινόμενον, μηδὲν ἀποδεῖν μαρτυρίου δοκεῖν.
 καὶ τὰ σώματα δὲ τῶν ἁγίων ὑπτίαις χερσὶ καὶ κόλποις ὑπολαμβάνοντες καθαιροῦντές τε ὀφθαλμοὺς καὶ στόματα συγκλείοντες ὠμοφοροῦντές τε καὶ διατιθέντες, προσκοΛΛώμενοι, συμπλεκόμενοι, λουτροῖς τε καὶ περιστολαῖς κατακοσμοῦντες, μετὰ μετὰ μικρὸν ἐτύγχανον τῶν ἴσων, ἀεὶ τῶν ὑπολειπομένων ἐφεπομένων τοῖς πρὸ αὐτῶν.
 τὰ δέ γε ἔθνη πᾶν τοὐναντίον·
 καὶ νοσεῖν ἀρχομένους ἀπωθοῦντο καὶ ἀπέφευγον τοὺς φιλτάτους κἀν ταῖς ὁδοῖς ἐρρίπτουν ἡμιθνῆτας καὶ νεκροὺς ἀτάφους ἀπεσκυβαλίζοντο, τὴν τοῦ θανάτου διάδοσιν καὶ κοινωνίαν ἐκτρεπόμενοι, οf themselvesand clave toone another, visiting the sick without a thought as to the danger, assiduously ministering to them, tending them in Christ, and so most gladly departed this life along with them;
 being infected with the disease from others, drawing uponthemselvesthe sickness from their neighbours, and willingly taking over their pains.
 Αnd many, when theyhad cared forandrestoredto health οthers, died themselves, thus transferring their death to themselves, and then in very deed making good the popular saying, that always seems to be merely an οf courtesy:
 for῾ in departing’they became ῾their devoted’ 1 In this manner the best at any rate οf our brethren departed this life, certain presbyters and deacons and some of the laity, receiving great commendation, so that this form of death seems in no respect to come behind martyrdom, beingtheoutcome of much piety and strong faith.
 So, too, the bodies of the saints they would take up in their οpen hands to their bosom, closing their eyes and shutting their mouths, carrying them on their shoulders and laying them οut;
 they would cling to them, embrace them, bathe and adorn them with their burial clothes, and aftera little receive the same services themselves, for those that were left behind were ever following those that went before.
 But the conduct of the heathen was the exact opposite.
 Εven those who were in the first stages of the diseasethey thrust away, and fled from their dearest.
 They would even cast them in the roads half- dead, and treat the unburied corpsesas vile refuse, in their attempts to avoid the spreading and contagion of the death- μένοι, ἢν οὐκ ἢν καὶ πολλὰ μηχανωμένοις ἐκκλῖναι ῥᾴδιον.
” Μετὰ δὲ καὶ ταύτην τὴν ἐπιοτολήν, εἰρηνευσάντων τῶν κατὰ τὴν πόλιν, τοῖς κατ’ Αἴγυπτον ἀδελφοῖς ἑορταστικὴν αὖθις ἐπιατέλλει γραφήν, καὶ ἐπὶ ταύτῃ πάλιν ἄλλας διατυποῦται·
 φέρεται δέ τις αὐτοῦ καὶ περὶ ααββάτου καὶ ἄλλη περὶ γυμνααίου.
 Ἐρμάμμωνι δὲ πάλιν καὶ τοῖς κατ’ Αἴγυπτον ἀδελφοῖς δι’ ἐπιατολἠς ὁμιλῶν πολλά τε ἄλλα περὶ τῆς Δεκίου καὶ τῶν μετ’ αὐτὸν διεξελθὼν κακοτροπίας, τῆς κατὰ τὸν Γαλλιῆνον εἰρήνης ἐπιμιμνήσκεται·
 XXΙΙI.
 οὐδὲν δὲ οἷον τὸ καὶ τούτων ὧδέ πως ἐχόντων ἀκοῦσαι·
 “ Ἐκεῖνος μὲν οὗν τῶν ἑαυτοῦ βασιλέων τὸν μὲν προέμενος, τῷ δὲ ἐπιθέμενος, παγγενεῖ ταχέως καὶ πρόρριζος, ἐξηφανίσθη, ἀνεδείχθη δὲ καὶ αυνανωμολογήθη παρὰ πάντων ὁ Γαλλῆνος, παλαιὸς ἅμα βααιλεὺς καὶ νέος, πρῶτος ὢν καὶ μετ’ ἐκείνους παρών.
 κατὰ γὰρ τὸ ῥηθὲν πρὸς τὸν προφήτην Ἡσαΐαν τὰ ἀπ’ ἀρχῆς ἰδοὺ ἥκααιν, καὶ καινὰ ἃ νῦν ἀνατελεῖ.
᾿ ὥσπερ γὰρ νέφος τὰς ἡλιακὰς ἀκτῖνας ὑποδραμὸν καὶ πρὸς ὀλίγον ἐπηλυγάσαν ἐσκίασεν αὐτὸν καὶ ἀντ᾿ αὐτοῦ προεφάνη, εἶτα παρελθόντος ἢ διατακέντος τοῦ νέφους, ἐξεφάνη πάλιν ἐπανατείλας ὁ προανατείλας ἥλιος, οὕτω προατὰς καὶ προσπελάσας ἑαυτὸν ὁ Μακριανὸς τῆς ἐφεατώσης Γαλλιήνου βασιλείας, ὃ μὲν οὐκ ἔατιν, ἐπεὶ μηδὲ ἢν, ὃ δὲ ἔστιν ὁμοίως ὥσπερ ἦν, καὶ οἷον ἀποθεμένη τὸ γῆρας ἡ βασιλεία καἰ plague;
a thing which, forall their devices, it was not easy for themto escape.
” Αnd alsoafterthis letter, when peace reigned in the city, he once more sent a festal letter to the brethren in Egypt, and following this he again indited οthers.
 Αnd there is extant, also,a certain letter of hison the Sabbath, and anotheron Exercise.
 Communicating by a letter again with Ηermammon and the brethrenin Εgypt, he recounts in full many other things about the wickedness of Deeiusandhis successors,and mentions the peace under Gallienus.
 XXIII.
 But there is nothing like hearing the nature of these happenings also.
“ He1 then, after inciting oneof his emperors andattacking the other, of asudden disappeared altogether, root and branch withallhis family, and Gallienus was proclaimed andacknowledgedby all, being at oncean old anda new emperor,forhe was before and came after them;
 for in accordance with that which was spoken to the prophet Isaiah:
῾ Behold, the former things are come to pass, and newthings which shall now spring forth. ’
 2 For as a cloud speeds underneath the rays of the sun, and fora short time screensand darkens it, and appears instead of it, but when the cloud passes by or is melted away, the sun that shone before again shines forth and once more appears;
 so Macrianus, after coming forward and getting for himself access to the imperial power that belonged to Gallienus, is no more, since indeedhe never was, while Gallienus is like as he was before;
 and the monarchy has, as it attempted to dethrone Gallienus( 10.
 8).
 Ηe and hisson were subsequently defeated in battle and τὴν προοῦσαν ἀνακαθηραμένη κακίαν, ἀκμαιότερον νῦν ἐπανθεῖ καὶ πορρώτερον ὁρᾶται καὶ ἀκούεται καὶ διαφοιτᾷ πανταχοῦ.
” Eἶθ᾿ ἑξῆς καὶ τὸν χρόνον, καθ’ ὃν ταῦτ᾿ ἔγραφεν, διὰ τούτων σημαίνει·
“ καί μοι πάλιν τὰς ἡμέρας τῶν βασιλικῶν ἐτῶν ἔπειαι σκοπεῖν.
 ὁρῶ γάρ, ὡς ὀνομασθέντες μὲν οἱ ἀσεβέοτατοι μετ’ οὐ πολὺ γεγόνασιν ἀνώνυμοι, ὁ δὲ ὁσιώτερος καὶ φιλοθεώτερος ὑπερβὰς τὴν ἑπταετηρίδα, νῦν ἐνιαυτὸν ἔνατον διανύει, ἐν ᾧ ἡμεῖς ἑορτάαωμεν.
” XXIV.
 Ἐπὶ τούτοις ἅπασιν απουδάξεται αὐτῶ καὶ τὰ Περὶ ἐπαγγελιῶν δύο αυγγράμματα, ἡ δ᾿ ὑπόθεαις αὐτῷ Νέπως ἦν, ἐπίσκοπος τῶν κατ’ Αἴγυπτον, Ἰουδαϊκώτερον τὰς ἐπηγγελμένας τοῖς ἁγίοις ἐν ταῖς θείαις γραφαῖς ἐπαγγελίας ἄπο.
 δοθήσεαθαι διδάσκων καί τινα χιλιάδα ἐτῶν τρυφῆς σωματικῆς ἐπὶ τῆς ξηρᾶς ταύτης ἔσεσθαι ὑποτιθέμενος.
 δόξας γοῦν οὗτος ἐκ τῆς Ἀποκαλύφεως Ἰωάννου τὴν ἰδίαν κρατύνειν ὑπόληψιν, Ἔλεγχον ἀλληγοριατῶν λόγον τινὰ περὶ τούτου συντάξας ἐπέγραψεν·
 πρὸς ὃν ὁ Διονύσιος ἐν τοῖς Περὶ ἐπαγγελιῶν ἐνίσταται, διὰ μὲν τοῦ προτέρου τὴν αὐτοῦ γνώμην ἣν εἶχεν περὶ τοῦ δόγματος, πάρατιθέμενος, διὰ δὲ τοῦ δευτέρου περὶ τῆς Ἀποκαλύφεως Ἰωάννου διαλαμβάνων·
 ἔνθα τοῦ Νέπωτος κατὰ τὴν ἀρχὴν μνημονεύσας, ταῦτα περὶ αὐτοῦ γράφει·
 “ ἐπεὶ δὲ σύνταγμά τι προκομίζουσιν were, put aside its old age and cleansed itselffrom its former wickedness, and now blossoms forthin fuller bloom, is seenand heard more widely and spreads abroad everywhere.
” Then, following on this, he indicatesalsothe time at whichhe wrote this, in these words:
“ Αnd it occurstome once more to observethe days of the imperial years.
 ForI perceive thatthose wicked persons, though they werenamedwith honour, after a short time have become nameless;
 while he, who is holier and filled with more loveto God, has Ρassed the periodof seven years, and isnow completinganinth year,1 in whichlet us keepthe feast.
” XXIV.
 Besides all these, the two treatises On Promises were also composedby him.
 The occasion was supplied him by theteachingof Νepos,a bishop ofthosein Εgypt, that the promises whieh had been made to the saints in the divine scriptures should be interpreted afteramore Jewish fashion, and his assdumption that there will be a kind of millennium on this earth devoted to bodily indulgenee.
 Thinking for example, to establish his own peculiar opinion from the Apocalypseof John, he composeda certain bookon the subjectandentitled it Refutationofthe Allegorists.
 2 Dionysius attaeked him in the books On Promises, in the firstof which he sets outthe view thathehimself held with regardto the doctrine, and inthe seeond treats of the Apocalypseof John.
 There, at the beginning, he mentions Νepos, writing as follows about him:
“ But since they bring forward in his ninth year he was, to use Dionysius's metaphor,“ undera cloud.
 ” Νέπωτος, ᾧ λίαν ἐπερείδονται ὡς ἀναντιρρήτως ἀποδεικνύντι τὴν τοῦ χριατοῦ βασιλείαν ἐπὶ γῆς ἔσεσθαι, ἐν ἄλλοις μὲν πολλοῖς ἀποδέχομαι καὶ ἀγαπῶ Νέπωτα τῆς τε πίστεως καὶ τῆς φιλοπονίας καὶ τῆς ἐν ταῖς γραφαῖς διατριβῆς καὶ τῆς πολλῆς ψαλμῳδίας, ᾖ μέχρι νῦν πολλοὶ τῶν ἀδελφῶν εὐθυμοῦνται, καὶ πάνυ δι’ αἰδοῦς ἄγω τὸν ἄνθρωπον, ταύτῃ μᾶλλον ᾖ προανεπαύσατο·
 ἀλλὰ φίλη γὰρ καὶ προτιμοτάτη πάντων ἡ ἀλήθεια, ἐπαινεῖν τε χρὴ καὶ αυναινεῖν ἀφθόνως, εἴ τι ὀρθῶς λέγοιτο, ἐξετάζειν δὲ καὶ διευθύνειν, εἴ τι μὴ φαίνοιτο ὑγιῶς ἀναγεγραμμένον.
 καὶ πρὸς μὲν παρόντα καὶ φιλῶ λόγῳ δογματίζοντα αὐτάρκης ἦν ἂν ἡ ἄγραφος ὁμιλία, δι’ ἐρωτήσεως καὶ ἀποκρίσεως πείθουσα καὶ συμβιβάζουσα τοὺς ἀντιδιατιθεμένους·
 γραφῆς δὲ ἐκκειμένης, ὡς δοκεῖ τισιν, πιθανωτάτης καί τινων διδασκάλων τὸν μὲν νόμον καὶ τοὺς προφήτας τὸ μηδὲν ἡγουμένων καὶ τὸ τοῖς εὐαγγελίοις ἕπεαθαι παρέντων καὶ τὰς τῶν ἀποστόλων ἐπιστολὰς ἐκφαυΛισάντων, τὴν δὲ τοῦ συγγράμματος τούτου διδασκαλίαν ὡς μέγα δή τι καὶ κεκρυμμένον μυατήριον κατεπαγγελλομένων καὶ τοὺς ἁπλουστέρους ἀδελφοὺς ἡμῶν οὐδὲν ἐώντων ὑψηλὸν καὶ μεγαλεῖον φρονεῖν οὔτε περὶ τῆς ἐνδόξου καὶ ἀληθῶς ἐνθέου τοῦ κυρίου ἡμῶν ἐπιφανείας οὔτε τῆς ἡμετέρας ἐκ νεκρῶν ἀναστασεως καὶ τῆς πρὸς αὐτὸν ἐπισυναγωηῆς καὶ ὁμοιώσεως, ἀλλὰ μικρὰ καὶ θνητὰ καὶ οἷα τὰ νῦν, ἐλπίζειν ἀναπειθόντων ἐν τῆ βασιλείᾳ τοῦ θεοῦ, ἀναγκαῖον καὶ ἡμᾶς ὡς πρὸς παρόντα τὸν ἀδελφὸν ἡμῶν διαλεχθῆναι Νέπωτα.’
 ’ τούτοις μεθ’ ἕτερα ἐπιφέρει λέγων·
“ ἐν μὲνa certain compositionof Νepοs,on which they rely greatly as proving indisputably that the kingdom Christ will be on earth, let me say that in manyother respectsI approve and love Νepos, for his faith and devotion to work, his diligentstudy of the Scripturesandhis abundant psalmody, by which many of the brethren have till this day been cheered;
 and I am fullοf respeetful regardfor the man, all the more for that he has gone to his rest already.
 But truth is dear and to be honoured above all things,1 and one must give ungrudging praise and assent to whatever is stated rightly, but examine and correct whatever appears to be unsoundly written.
 Αnd if he were present and putting forward his opinions merelyin words, conversation, without writing, would be sufficient, persuading and instructing by question and answer‘ them that oppose themselves.’
 But whena book is published, which somethink most convicing, and when certain teachers, who consider the law and the prophets of no valueanddisregard the followingofthe Gospels and depreciate the epistles of the apostles, yet make promises concerning the teaching οf this treatise as if it were some great and hidden mystery, and do not suffer the simpler of our brethren to have highand noble thoughts, either aboutthe glorious and truly divine appearing οf οur Lord, or οfour resurrection from the dead and our gathering together and being made like unto Ηim,but persuade them to hope for what is petty and mortal and like the present in the kingdom of God— then we also are compelled to argue with Nepos our brother as if he were present.
” Αfter other remarks he adds as follows:
 ‘ ‘ Νοw οὖν τῷ Αρσενοΐτῃ γενόμενος, ἔνθα, ὡς οἶδας, πρὸ πολλοῦ τοῦτο ἐπεπόλαζεν τὸ δόγμα, ὡς καὶ σχίσματα καὶ ἀποστασίας ὅλων ἐκκλησιῶν γεγονέναι, συγκαλέσας τοὺς πρεσβυτέρους καὶ διδασκάλους ἐν ταῖς κώμαις ἀδελφῶν, παρόντων καὶ τῶν βουλομένων ἀδελφῶν, δημοσίᾳ τὴν ἐξέτασιν ποιήσασθαι τοῦ λόγου προετρεψάμην, καὶ τοῦτό μοι προσαγαγόντων τὸ βιβλίον ὥς τι ὅπλον καὶ τεῖχος ἄμαχον, συγκαθεσθεὶς αὐτοῖς τριῶν ἑξῆς ἡμερῶν ἐξ ἕω μέχρις ἑσπέρας, διευθύνειν ἐπειράθην τὰ γεγραμμένα·
 ἔνθα καὶ τὸ εὐσταθὲς καὶ τὸ φιλάληθες καὶ τὸ εὐπαρακολούθητον καὶ συνετὸν ὑπερηγάσθην τῶν ἀδελφῶν, ὡς ἐν τάξει καὶ μετ’ ἐπιεικείας τὰς ἐρωτήσεις καὶ τὰς ἐπαπορήσεις καὶ τὰς συγκαταθέσεις ἐποιούμεθα, τὸ μὲν ἐκ παντὸς τρόπου καὶ φιλονείκως τῶν ἅπαξ δοξάντων περιέχεαθαι, εἰ καὶ μὴ φαίνοιτο ὀρθῶς ἔχοντα, παραιτηαάμενοι, μήτε δὲ τὰς ἀντιλογίας ὑποστελλόμενοι, ἀλλ’ ἐς ὅσον οἷόν τε, τῶν προκειμένων καὶ κρατύνειν αὐτὰ πειρώμενοι, μήτε, εἰ λόγος αἱροῖ, μεταπείθεσθαι καὶ ἀνυποκρίτως αἰδούμενοι, ἀλλ’ εὐσυνειδήτως καὶ ἀνυποκρίτως καὶ ταῖς καρδίαις πρὸς τὸν θεὸν ἡπλωμέναις τὰ ταῖς ἀποδείξεσι καὶ διδασκαλίαις τῶν ἁγίων γραφῶν συνιστανόμενα καταδεχόμενοι.
 καὶ τέλος ὅ τε τῆς διδαχῆς ταύτης ἀρχηγὸς καὶ εἰσηγητής, ὁ καλούμενος κορακίων, ἐν ἐπηκόῳ πάντων τῶν παρόντων ἀδελφῶν ὡμολόγησεν καἰ διεμαρτύρατο ἡμῖν μηκέτι τούτῳ προσέξειν μηδὲ διαλέξεσθαι περὶ τούτου μηδὲ μεμνῆσθαι μηδὲ διδάξειν, ὡς ἱκανῶς ὑπὸ τῶν ἀντιλεχθέντων ἠρημένος·
 τῶν τε ἄλλων ἀδελφῶν οἳ μὲν ἔχαιρον whenI came to thenomeof Arsinoë, where, as owest, this doctrine had long been prevalent, so hat schismsand defections of wholechurches had place,I called together the presbyters and cachers οf the brethren in the villages( there were resent also such οf the brethrenas wished), andI urged them to hold the examinartion of the question publicly.
 Αnd when they brought me this book as some invincible weapon and rampart,I sat with themand for three successive days from morn till night ttempted to correct what had been written.
 On at occasionI conceived the greatest admiration fore brethren, their firmness, love of truth, facility inllowingan argument, and intelligence, as we prounded in order and with forbearance the questions, the difficulties raised and the points of agreement;
 οn the one handrefusingto cling obstinately and at all costs( even though they were manifestly wrong) to opinions once held;
 and on the other hand not shirking the counter- arguments,but as far as possible attempting to grapple with the question in nd and master them.
 Νor, if convinced by reason, ere we ashamed to change our opinions and give ur assent;
 but conscientiously and unfeignedly and ith hearts laid open to God we accepted whatever as established by the proofs and teachings of the οly Scriptures.
 Αnd in the end the leader and troducer of this teaching, Coracion, as he was lled, in the hearingof all the brethren present, assented,and testified to us thathewould no longerereto it, nor discourse upon it, nor mentionnor ach it, since he had been sufficiently convinced bye contrary arguments.
 Αnd as to the rest of the ἐπὶ τῆ κοινολογίᾳ καὶ τῆ πρὸς πάντας συγκαταβάσει καὶ συνδιαθέσει.
” XXV.
 Εἶθ’ ἑξῆς ὑποβάς, περὶ τῆς Ἀποκκαλύψεως Ἰωάννου ταῦτά φησιν·
 “ τινὲς μὲν οὖν τῶν πρὸ ἡμῶν ἠθέτησαν καὶ ἀνεσκεύασαν πάντη τὸ βιβλίον, καθ’ ἕκαστον κεφάλαιον διευθύνοντες ἄγνωστόν τε καὶ ἀσυλλόγιστον ἀποφαίνοντες ψεύδεσθαί τε τὴν ἐπιγραφήν.
 Ἰωάννου γὰρ οὐκ εἶναι λέγουσιν, ἀλλ’ οὐδ’ ἀποκάλυφιν εἶναι τὴν σφόδρα καὶ παχεῖ κεκαλυμμένην τῷ τῆς ἀγνοίας παραπετάσματι, καὶ οὐχ ὅπως τῶν ἀποστόλων τινά, ἀλλ’ οὐδ’ ὅλως τῶν ἁγίων ἢ τῶν ἀπὸ τῆς ἐκκλησίας τούτου γεγονέναι ποιητὴν τοῦ γράμματος, Κήρινθον δὲ τὸν καὶ τὴν ἀπ’ ἐκείνου κληθεῖσαν Κηρινθιανὴν συστησάμενον αἵρεσιν, ἀξιόπιστον ἐπιφημίσαι θελήσαντα τῷ ἑαυτοῦ πλάσματι ὄνομα.
 τοῦτο γὰρ εἶναι τῆς διδασκαλίας αὐτοῦ τὸ δόγμα, ἐπίγειον ἔσεσθαι τὴν τοῦ χριστοῦ βασιλείαν, καὶ ὧν αὐτὸς ὠρέγετο, φιλοσώματος ὢν καὶ πάνυ σαρκικός, ἐν τούτοις ὀνειροπολεῖν ἔσεσθαι, γαστρὸς καὶ τῶν ὑπὸ γαστέρα πλησμοναῖς, τοῦτ' ἐστὶ αἰτίοις καὶ ποτοῖς καὶ γάμοις καὶ δι’ ὧν εὐφημότερον ταῦτα ᾠήθη ποριεῖσθαι, ἑορταῖς καὶ θυσίαις καὶ ἱερείων σφαγαῖς.
 ἐγὼ δὲ ἀθετῆσαι μὲν οὐκ ἂν τολμήσαι τὸ βιβλίον, πολλῶν αὐτὸ διὰ σπουδῆς ἐχόντων ἀδελφῶν, μείζονα δὲ τῆς ἐμαυτοῦ φρονήσεως τὴν ὑπόληφιν τὴν περὶ αὐτοῦ λαμβάνων, κεκρυμμένην εἶναί τινα καὶ θαυμασιωτέραν τὴν καθ’ ἕκαστον ἐκδοχὴν ὑπολαμβάνω.
 καὶ γὰρ εἰ μὴ συνίημι, ἀλλ’ ὑπονοῶ γε νοῦν τινα βαθύτερον ἐγκεῖσθαι τοῖς brethren, some rejoiced atthejoint conrerence, ande mutual deferenceand unanimity which all isplayed.
.
.
. ’
’ XXV.
 Then,in due course, lower downhe speaks thus, with referenceto the Apocalypse of John:
“ Some indeed of those before our time rejected altogether impugned the book, examining it chapter by chapter and declaring it to be unintelligible and by chapter and declaring it to be unintelligible and illogical, and its title false.
 For they say that it isnotJohn's, no, nor yet an apocalypse( unveiling), since it is veiled by its heavy, thick curtainof unintelligibility;
 and that the author of this book was not only not one of the apostles, nor evenoneof ints or those belongingto the chureh, but Cerinthus,e same who created the seet called“ Cerinthian’’ after him, since he desired to affix to his own forgerya name worthy of credit.
 For that this was the doctrine which he taught, that the kingdomof christ wouldbe οn earth;
 and he dreamed that it would consist in those things which formed the object of his own desires( for hewasa lover of the bodyand altogether camal), in the full satisfaction of the bellyand lower lusts, that is, in feasts and carousals and marriages, and(as a means,he thought, οf procuringd lowerd not lower lusts, that is, in feasts and undera better name) in festivalsand sacrinces and slayingsof victims.
 1 But for my part I should not dare to reject the book, since many my brethren hold it in estimatin;
 but, reckoning that my perceptionοt dare toreject the book,since many brethren hold is inadequateto form anopinionconcerning it,I hold whattheinterpretation of each several passage is in some way hidden and more wonderful.
 2 For even although I do not understand it, yet I suspect that some deeper meaning underlies the words.
 ForI ῥήμασιν, οὐκ ἰδίῳ ταῦτα μετρῶν καὶ κρίνων λογισμῷ, πίστει δὲ τὸ πλέον νέμων ὑψηλότερα ἢ ὐπ’ ἐμοῦ καταληφθῆναι νενόμικα, καὶ οὐκ ἀποδοκιμάζω ταῦτα ἃ μὴ συνεώρακα, θαυμάξω δὲ μᾶλλον ὅτι μὴ καὶ εἶδον.
 Ἑπὶ τούτοις τὴν ὅλην τῆς Ἀποκαλύψεως βασανίσας γραφὴν ἀδύνατόν τε αὐτὴν κατὰ τὴν πρόχειρον ἀποδείξας νοεῖσθαι διάνοιαν, ἐπιφέρει λέγων·
 “ συντελέσας δὴ πᾶσαν ὡς εἰπεῖν τὴν προφητείαν, μακαρίζει ὁ προφήτης τούς τε προφητείαν, αὐτὴν καὶ δὴ καὶ ἑαυτόν.
 ‘ μακάριος’ φησιν‘ ὁ τηρῶν τοὺς λόγους τῆς προφητείας τοῦ βιβλίου τούτου κἀγὼ Ἰωάννης ὁ βλέπων καὶ ἀκούων ταῦτα. ’
 καλεῖσθαι μὲν οὖν αὐτὸν Ἰωάννην καὶ εἶναι τὴν γραφὴν Ἰωάννου ταύτην οὐκ ἀντερῶ, ἁγίου μὲν γὰρ εἶναί τινος καὶ θεοπνεύστου συναινῶ·
 οὐ μὴν ῥᾳδίως ἂν συνθείμην τοῦτον εἶναι τὸν ἀπόστολον, τὸν υἱὸν Ζεβεδαίου, τὸν ἀδελφὸν Ἰακώβου, οὗ τὸ εὐαγγέλιον τὸ κατὰ Ιωάννην ἐπιγεγραμμένον καὶ ἡ ἐπιστολὴ ἡ καθολική.
 γὰρ ἔκ τε τοῦ ἤθους ἑκατέρων καὶ τοῦ τῶν λόγων εἴδους καὶ τῆς τοῦ βιβλίου διεξαγωγῆς λεγομένης, μὴ τὸν αὐτὸν εἶναι.
 ὁ μὲν γὰρ εὐαγγελιστὴς οὐδαμοῦ τὸ ὄνομα αὐτοῦ παρεγγράφει οὐδὲ κηρύσσει ἑαυτὸν οὔτε διὰ τοῦ εὐαγγελίου διὰ τῆς ἐπιστολῆς. ’
’ Εἶθ' ὑποβάς, πάλιν ταῦτα λέγει·
 “ Ἰωάννης δὲ οὐδαμοῦ, οὐδὲ ὡς περὶ ἑαυτοῦ οὐδὲ ὡς περὶ ἑτέρου·
 ὁ δὲ τὴν Ἀποκάλυψιν γραφὰς εὐθύς τε ἐν ἀρχῇ ἑαυτὸν προτάσσειἴ’ Ἀποκάλυψις Ἰησοῦ Χριστοῦ, ἢν ἔδωκεν αὐτῷ δεῖξαι τοῖς δούλοις αὐτοῦ ἐν τάχει, καὶ ἐσήμανεν ἀποστείλας διὰ τοῦ do not measure and judge these things by my own reasoning, but, assigning to faith the greater value,I have come to the conclusion that they aretoo high formy comprehension,andI do not reject whatIhave not understood, butI rather wonder thatIdid not indeedsee them.
” Moreover, after closely examining the whole book οf the Apocalypse and demonstrating that it cannot be understoodinthe literal sense, he adds as follows:
“ After completing the whole, one mightsay,of his prophecy, the prophetealls those blessedwho observe it,and indeed himself also;
 for he says:
῾ Blessed is he that keepeth the words οf the prophecy of this book, andI John, he that saw and heard these things.’
 That then, he was certainly named John and that this book is by one John,I will not gainsay;
 forI fully allow that it is the work of some holy and inspired person.
 ButI should not readily agree that he wasthe apostle,the son Zebedee, the brotherof James, whose are the Gospel entitled According to John and the Catholic Epistle.
 ForI fonn my judgementfromthe character of each and from the nature of the language and from What is known as the general construction of the book, that the John therein mentioned is notthesame.
 For the evangelist nowhere adds his name, nor yet proclaims himself, throughout either the Gospel or the Epistle.
” Then lower down he again speaks thus:
 “.
.
.
 But John nowhere, either in the first or the third person.
 But he who wrote the Apocalypse at the verybeginning puts himself forward:
῾ The Revelationof Jesus Christ, which he gave him to show untohis servants quickly, and he sent and signified it by his angel ἀγγέλου αὐτοῦ τῷ δούλῳ αὐτοῦ Ἰωάννῃ, ὃς ἐμαρτύρησεν τὸν λόγον τοῦ θεοῦ καὶ τὴν μαρτυρίαν αὐτοῦ, ὅσα εἶδεν᾿.
 εἶτα καὶ ἐπιστολὴν γράφει·
 Ἰωάννης ταῖς ἑπτὰ ἐκκΛησίαις ταῖς ἐν τῆ Ἀσίᾳ, χάρις ὑμῖν καὶ εἰρήνη. ’
 ὁ δέ γε εὐαγγελιστὴς οὐδὲ τῆς καθολικῆς ἐπιστολῆς προέγραφεν ἑαυτοῦ τὸ ὄνομα, ἀλλὰ ἀπερίττως ἀπ’ αὐτοῦ τοῦ μυστηρίου τῆς θείας ἀποκαλύψεως ἤρξατο·
 ἴ’ ὃ ἦν ἀπ’ ἀρχῆς, ὃ ἀκηκόαμεν, δ’ ἑωράκαμεν τοῖς ὀφθαλμοῖς ἡμῶν᾿.
 ἐπὶ ταύτῃ γὰρ τῇ ἀποκαλύψει καὶ ὁ κύριος τὸν Πέτρον ἐμακάρισεν, εἰπών·
 μακάριος εἰ Σίμων βὰρ Ἴω ὅτι ὅτι καὶ αἷμα οὐκ ἀπεκάλυψέν ἀοῖ, ἀλλ’ ὁ πατήρ μου ὁ οὐράνιος.’
 ἀλλ’ οὐδὲ ἐν τῆ δευτέρᾳ φερομένῃ Ἰωάννου καὶ τρίτῃ, καίτοι βραχείαις οὔσαις ἐπιστολαῖς, ὁ Ἰωάννης ὀνομαστὶ πρόκειται, ἀλλὰ ἀνωνύμως ἴ’ ὁ πρεσβύτερος γέγραπται.
 οὗτος δὲ γέγραπται.
 οὕτος’ δε γε οὐδὲ αὔταρκες ἐνόμισεν, εἰς ἅπαξ ἑαυτὸν ὀνομάσας διηγεῖσθαι τὰ ἑξῆς, ἀλλὰ πάλιν ἀναλαμβάνειἴ’ ἐγὼ Ἰωάννης, ὁ ἀδελφὸς ὑμῶν καὶ συγκοινωνὸς ἐν τῇ θλίψει καὶ βασιλείᾳ καὶ ἐν ὑπομονῇ Ἰησοῦ, ἐγενόμην ἐν τῇ νήσῳ τῆ καλουμένῃ Πάτμῳ διὰ τὸν λόγον τοῦ θεοῦ καὶ τὴν μαρτυρίαν Ἰησοῦ.
᾿ καὶ δὴ καὶ πρὸς τῷ τέλει ταῦτα εἶπεν·
 ἴ’ μακάριος ὁ τηρῶν τοὺς λόγους τῆς προφητείας τοῦ βιβλίου τούτου κἀγὼ Ἰωάννης ὁ βλέπων καὶ ἀκούων ταῦτα.’
 “ Ὅτι μὲν οὖν Ἰωάννης ἐστὶν ὁ ταῦτα γράφων, αὐτῷ λέγοντι πιστευτέον·
 ποῖος δὲ οὗτος, ἄδηλον.
 οὐ γὰρ εμεν ἑαυτὸν εἶναι, ὡς ἐν τῷ εὐαγγελίῳ πολλαχοῦ, τὸν ἠγαπημένον ὑπὸ τοῦ κυρίου μαθητὴν οὐδὲ τὸν ἀναπεσόντα ἐπὶ τὸ στῆθος αὐτοῦ οὐδὲ ἀδελφὸν Ἰακώβου οὐδὲ τὸν αὐτόπτην καὶ αὐτήκοον his servant John;
 who bare wrtness of the word of God and his testimony, even of all things that he saw.’
 Then he also writes an epistle:
‘ John to seven churches which are in Asia;
 Grace to you and peace.’
 But the evagelistdid not write hiseven at the beginningofthe Catholic Epistle, but without anything superfluous began with the mystery itself of the divine revelation:
‘ That whichwasfrom the beginning, that whichwe have heard, that which we have seen with our eyes.’
 It wasinrespect of this revelation that the Lord called Peter saying:
 ‘ Blessed art thou, Simon Bar- Jonah:
 flesh and blood hath not revealed it unto thee, but my heavenly Father.’
 Nay, not even in the second οr third extant epistles of John, although theyare short, is John set forth by name;
 but he has written‘ the elder,’ without giving his name.
 But this writer did not even eonsider it sufficient, harivlng oncementioned his name, to nanate what follows, but he takes up his name again:
‘I John, your brother and partaker with you in the tribulation and kingdom and in the patienceof Jesus, was in the isle that is called Patomos forthe word ofoodand the testimonyοf Jesus. ’
 Moreover at the close he speaks thus:
‘ Blessed is he that keepeth the words of the prophecy οf this book, andI John, he that saw and heard these things. ’
“ That the writerof these words, therefore,was John,one must beieve, since he says it.
 But What John, is not clear.
 For he ffid not say thathe was,asis frequently said in the Gospel, the disciple lovedby the Lord, nor he whieh leaned back οn Ηis breast, nor thebrother οf James, nor the eye- witness and τοῦ κυρίου γενόμενον.
 εἶπεν γὰρ ἄν τι τούτων τῶν προδεδηλωμένων, σαφῶς ἑαυτὸν ἐμφανίσαι βουλόμενος·
 ἀλλὰ τούτων μὲν οὐδέν, ἀδελφὸν δὲ ἡμῶν καὶ συγκοινωνὸν εἶπεν καὶ μάρτυρα Ἰησοῦ καὶ μακάριον ἐπὶ τῆ θέᾳ καὶ ἀκοῇ τῶν ἀποκαλύψεων.
 πολλοὺς δὲ ὁμωνύμους Ἰωάννῃ τῷ ἀποστόλῳ νομίζω γεγονέναι, οἳ διὰ τὴν πρὸς ἐκεῖνον ἀγάπην καὶ τῷ θαυμάζειν καὶ ζηλοῦν ἀγαπηθῆναί τε ὁμοίως αὐτῷ βούλεσθαι ὑπὸ τοῦ κυρίου, καὶ τὴν ἐπωνυμίαν τὴν ἀυτὴν ησπασαντο, ὥσπερ καὶ ὁ Παῦλος πολὺς καὶ δὴ καὶ ὁ Πέτρος ἐν τοῖς τῶν πιστῶν παισὶν ὀνομάζεται.
 ἔστιν μὲν οὖν καὶ ἕτερος Ἰωάννης ἐν ταῖς Πράξεσι τῶν ἀποστόλων, ὁ ἐπικληθεὶς Μάρκος, ὃν Βαρνάβας καὶ Παῦλος ἑαυτοῖς συμπαρέλαβον, περὶ οὗ καὶ πάλιν λέγειἴ’ εἶχον δὲ καὶ Ἰωάννην ὑπηρέτην.
 εἰ δὲ οὗτος ὁ γραφὰς ἐστίν, οὐκ ἂν φαίην·
 οὐδὲ γὰρ ἀφῖχθαι σὺν αὐτοῖς εἰς τὴν Ἀσίαν γέγραπται, ἀλλὰ ἀναχθέντες μέν,’ φησίν, ἀπὸ τῆς οἱ περὶ τὸν Παῦλον ἦλθον εἰς Πέργην τῆς Παμφυλίας, Ἰωάννης δὲ ἀποχωρήσας ἀπ’ αὐτῶν ὑπέστρεφεν εἰς Ἱεροσόλυμα’·
 ἄλλον δέ τινα ὄψαι τῶν ἐν Ἀσίᾳ γενομένων, ἐπεὶ καὶ δύο φασὶν ἐν Ἐφέσω γενέσθαι μνήματα καὶ ἑκάτερον Ἰωάννου λέγεσθαι.
“ καὶ ἀπὸ τῶν νοημάτων δὲ καὶ ἀπὸ τῶν τῶν ῥημάτων καὶ τῆς συντάξεως αὐτῶν εἰκότως ἕτερος οὗτος παρ’ ἐκεῖνον ὑποληφθήσεται.
 συνᾴδουσι μὲν γὰρ ἀλλήλοις τὸ εὐαγγέλιον καὶ ἢ ἐπιστολή, ὁμοίως τε ἄρχονται·
 τὸ μέν φησινἴ’ ἐν ἀρχῇ ἢν ὁ λόγος, ’ ἢ δὲἴ’ ὃ ἢν ἀπ’ ἀρχῆς’ τὸ μέν φησιν‘ καὶ hearer οfthe Lord.
 For he would have mentioned some one of these aforesaid epithets, had he wished to make himself clearly known.
 Yet he makes use of none of them, but speaks of himself asour brother and partaker with us, and a witness of Jesus, and blessedin seeing and hearingthe revelations.
I hold that there have been many persons of the same name as John the apostle, who for the love they bore him, and beeause they admired and esteemed him and wishedto be loved, as he was,of the Lord, were glad to take also the same name after him;
 just as Ρaul, and for that matter Peter too, is a common name among boys of believing parents.
 So then, there is also another John in the Αcts of the Αpostles, whose surname was Mark, whom Bamabas and Ρaul took with themselves, concerning whom also the scripture says again:
‘ Αnd theyhadalso John as their attendant.’
 But astowhetherit were hewas the writer,I should say Νο.
 For it is written that he did not arriveinΑsia along with them,but having set sail,the Scripture says, from Ρaphos Ρaul and his company came to Ρerga in Pamphylia;
 and John departed from them and retumed to Jerusalem.’
 ButI think that there wasa certain other Johnamong those that were in Αsia, sinee itis said both that there were two tombs at Εphesus,and that each of ulc twois said tobe’s.
“ Αnd fromthe conceptions too, and from the tennsand their arrangement, one might naturally assume that this writer wasa different person from the other.
 For there is indeed a mutual agreement between the Gospel andthe Εpistle, and they begin alike.
 The one says:
‘ In the beginningwas word’;
 the other:
‘ That whichwasfrom the begining.
 ' ὁ λόγος σὰρξ ἐγένετο καὶ ἐσκήνωσεν ἐν ἡμῖν καὶ ἐθεασάμεθα τὴν δόξαν αὐτοῦ, δόξαν ὡς μονογενοῦς παρὰ πατρός,’ ἢ δὲ τὰ αὐτὰ σμικρῷ παρηλλαγμέναδ’ ἀκηκόαμεν, ὃ ἑωράκαμεν τοῖς ὀφθαλμοῖς ἡμῶν,δ’ ἐθεασάμεθα καὶ αἱ χεῖρες ἡμῶν ἐψηλάφησαν, περὶ τοῦ λόγου τῆς ζωῆς καὶ ἡ ζωὴ ἐφανερώθη. ’
 ταῦτα γὰρ προανακρούεται, διατεινόμενος, ὡς ἐν τοῖς ἑξῆς ἐδήλωσεν, πρὸς τοὺς οὐκ ἐν φάσκοντας φάσκοντας ἐληλυθέναι τὸν κύριον·
 δι’ ἃ καὶ συνῆψεν ἐπιμελῶς‘ καὶδ’ ἑωράκαμεν, μαρτυροῦμεν καὶ ἀπαγγέλλομεν ὑμῖν τὴν ζωὴν τὴν αἰώνιον, ἥτις ἢν πρὸς τὸν πατέρα καὶ ἐφανερώθη ἡμὶν·
 δ’ ἑωράκαμεν καὶ ἀκηκόαμεν, ἀπαγγέλλομεν καὶ ὑμῖν.
᾿ ἔχεται αὐτοῦ καὶ τῶν προθέσεων οὐκ ἀφίσταται, διὰ δὲ τῶν αὐτῶν κεφαλαίων καὶ ὀνομάτων πάντα διεξέρχεται·
 ὧν τινὰ μὲν ἡμεῖς συντόμως ὑπομνήσομεν, ὁ δὲ προσεχῶς ἐντυγχάνων εὑρήσει ἐν ἑκατέρῳ πολλὴν τὴν ζωήν, πολὺ τὸ φῶς ἀποτροπὴν τοῦ σκότους, συνεχῆ τὴν ἀλήθειαν τὴν χάριν τὴν χαρὰν τὴν σάρκα καὶ τὸ αἷμα τοῦ κυρίου τὴν κρίσιν τὴν ἄφεσιν τῶν ἁμαρτιῶν πρὸς ἡμᾶς ἀγάπην τοῦ θεοῦ τὴν πρὸς ἀλλήλους ἡμᾶς ἀγάπης ἐντολήν, ὡς πάσας δεῖ φυλάττειν τὰς ἐντολάς·
 ὁ ἔλεγχος τοῦ κόσμου τοῦ The one says:
‘ Αnd theWordbecame nesh, and dwelt among us( and we beheld his glory, glory as of the only- begotten from the Father)’;
 the other, the same words slightly changed:
 That which we have heard, that wffihlch we have seen with our eyes, that whichwe beheld, and our hands handled, concerning the Word of life;
 and the life was manifested.’
 For these words he employs asa prelude, since he is aiming, as he shows in what follom, at thosewhowere asserting that the Lordhad not come in the flesh.
 Therefore he was careful also to add:
‘ Αnd that whichwe have seen,we bear witness, and declare untoyou the life,the eternal life, which waswith the Father, and was manifested unto us;
 that which we have seen and heard, declare we unto you also. ’
 1 Ηe is consistent with himself 2 and does depart from what he has proposed, but proceeds throughout under the same heads and expressions, certain of whieh we shall mention eoncisely.
 But the attentive reader will Rnd frequently in one and the other‘ the’3‘ the light,’ 4‘ turning darkness’;
 continually‘ the truth,’ 5‘ the‘the foy,’ 7‘the8and blood 9of the‘the judgement,’ 10‘ the forgivenessof sins,’ 11‘the love ofGodtoward us,’ 12 the‘ commandment’ that we should‘love one anothee,’ 13 that we should‘ keep ah the commanmnents’ 14;
 the‘ conviction’ of the διαβόλου τοῦ ἀντιχρίστου ἡ ἐπαγγελία τοῦ ἁγίου πνεύματος ἡ υἱοθεσία τοῦ θεοῦ ἡ διόλου πίστις ἡμῶν ἀπαιτουμένη ὁ πατὴρ καὶ ὁ υἱός, πανταχοῦ·
 καὶ ὅλως διὰ πάντων χαρακτηρίζοντας ἕνα καἰ τὸν αὐτὸν συνορᾶν τοῦ τε εὐαγγελίου καὶ τῆς ἐπιστολῆς χρῶτα πρόκειται.
 ἀλλοιοτάτη δὲ καὶ ξένη παρὰ ταῦτα ἡ Ἀποκάλυψις, μήτε ἐφαπτομένη μήτε γειτνιῶσα τούτων μηδενί, σχεδόν, ὡς εἰπεῖν, μηδὲ συλλαβὴν πρὸς αὐτὰ κοινὴν ἔχουσα·
 ἀλλ’ οὐδὲ μνήμην τινὰ οὐδὲ ἔννοιαν οὔτε ἢ ἐπιστολὴ τῆς’ Αποκαλύφεως ἔχει ἔα γὰρ τὸ εὐαγγέλιον) οὔτε τῆς ἐπιστολῆς ἡ’ Αποκάλυφις, Παύλου διὰ τῶν ἐπιστολῶν ὑποφήναντός τι καὶ περὶ τῶν ἀποκαλύψεων αὐτοῦ, ἃς οὐκ ἐνέγραφεν καθ’ αὑτάς.
 “ Ἔτι δὲ καὶ διὰ τῆς φράσεως τὴν διαφορὰν ἔστιν τεκμήρασθαι τοῦ εὐαγγελίου καὶ τῆς ἐπιστολῆς τὴν Ἀποκάλυψιν.
 τὰ μὲν γὰρ οὐ μόνον ἀπταίστωφς κατὰ τὴν τῶν Ἑλλήνων φωνήν, ἀλλὰ καὶ λογιώτατα ταῖς λέξεσιν τοῖς αυλλογισμοῖς ταῖς συντάξεσιν τῆς ἑρμηνείας γέγραπται, πολλοῦ γε δεῖ βάρβαρόν τινα φθόγγον ἢ σολοικισμὸν ἢ ὅλως ἰδιωτισμὸν ἐν αὐτοῖς εὑρεθῆναι·
 ἑκάτερον γὰρ εἶχεν, ὡς ἔοικεν, τὸν λόγον, ἀμφοτέρους αὐτῷ χαρισαμένου τοῦ κυρίου, τόν τε τῆς γνώσεως τόν τε τῆς φράσεως·
 τούτῳ δὲ ἀποκαλύψεις μὲν ἑωρακέναι καὶ γνῶσιν εἰληφέναι καὶ προφητείαν οὐκ ἀντερῶ, διάλεκτον μέντοι καὶ γλῶσσαν οὐκ ἀκριβῶς ἑλληνίζουσαν αὐτοῦ βλέπω, ἀλλ’ ἰδιώμασίν world,’1 of‘the devil,’2 of‘the antichriswt’ promise of the Ηoly spirit4;
 the adoption of the sons of God5;
 the the‘ faith’6 that is demandedof us throughout;
‘ the Father’ and‘the Son’7:
 these are to be found everywhere.
 Ina word, it is obrivlous that those who observe their character throughout will see at a glance that the Gospeland Εpistle have one and the same complexion.
 But the Apocalypse is utterly different from,and foreign to, these writings;
 it has no connexion, no affinity, in any way with them;
 it searcely, so to speak, has evena syllable in common with them.
 Νay more, neither does the Εpistle( not to speakofthe Gospel)contain any mention or thoughtof the Apocalypse, nor the Apocalypseofthe Εpistle, whereas Ρaul in his epistles gave usa little light alsoon his revelations, which he ffidJd not record separately.
“ Αnd further, by meansofthe style one can estimate the difference between the Gospel and Εpistle and the Αpocalypse.
 For the former are not only writtenin faultless Greek, but also show the greatest literary skill in their ffiction, their reasonings, and the constructions in which they are expressed.
 There is a complete absence ofany barbarous word, or soleeism, or any vulgarism whatever.
 For their author had,as it seemS, both kindof word, by the free gift of the Lord, the wordof knowledge andtheword of speech.
 ButI will not deny that the other writer had seen revelations and received knowledge and prophecy;
 neverthelessI observe his style and that his use of the Oreek language is not accurate, but that heemploysbarbarous idioms,in some places τε βαρβαρικοῖς χρώμενον καί που καὶ σολοικίζοντα·
 ἅπερ οὐκ ἀναγκαῖον νῦν ἐκλέγειν·
 οὐδὲ γὰρ ἐπισκώπτων μή τις νομίσῃ) ταῦτα εἶπον, ἀλλὰ μόνον τὴν ἀνομοιότητα διευθύνων τούτων τῶν γραφῶν.
" XXVI.
 Ἐπὶ ταύταις τοῦ Διονυσίου φέρονται καὶ ἄλλαι πλείους ἐπιστολαί, ὥσπερ αἱ κατὰ Σαβελλίου πρὸς Ἄμμωνα τῆς κατὰ Βερνίκην ἐκκλησίας ἐπίσκοπον καὶ ἡ πρὸς Τελεσφόρον καὶ ἡ πρὸς Εὐφράνορα καὶ πάλιν Ἄμμωνα καὶ Εὔπορον·
 συντάττει δὲ περὶ τῆς αὐτῆς ὑποθέσεως καὶ ἄλλα τέσσαρα συγγράμματα, ἃ τῷ κατὰ Ῥώμην ὁμωνύμῳ Διονυσίῳ προσφωνεῖ.
 καὶ πλείους δὲ παρὰ ταύτας εἰσὶν αὐτοῦ παρ’ ἡμῖν ἐπιστολαὶ καὶ δὴ καὶ πολυεπεῖς λόγοι ἐν ἐπιστολῆς χαρακτῆρι γραφέντες, ὡς οἱ περὶ φύσεως, Τιμοθέῳ τῷ παιδὶ προσπεφωνημένοι, καὶ ὁ περὶ πειρασμῶν, ὃν καὶ αὐτὸν Εὐφράνορι ἀνατέθεικεν.
 ἐπὶ τούτοις καὶ Βασιλείδῃ τῶν κατὰ τὴν Πεντάπολιν παροικιῶν ἐπισκότῳ γράφων, φησὶν ἑαυτὸν εἰς τὴν ἀρχὴν ἐξήγησιν πεποιῆσθαι τοῦ Ἐκκλησιαστοῦ, διαφόρους δ’ ἡμῖν τε καὶ πρὸς τοῦτον καταλέλοιπεν ἐπιστολάς.
 Τοσαῦτα ὁ Διονύσιος·
 ἀλλὰ γὰρ ἤδη μετὰ τὴν τούτων ιστορίαν φέρε, καὶ τὴν καθ’ ἡμᾶς τοῖς μετέπειτα γνωρίζειν γενεὰν ὁποία τις ἦν, παραδῶμεν.
 XXVII.
 Ξύστον τῆς‘ Ρωμαίων ἐκκλησίας ἔτεσιν ἕνδεκα προστάντα διαδέχεται τῷ κατ’ Ἀλεξάνδρειαν ὁμώνυμος Διονύσιος.
 ἐν τούτῳ δὲ καὶ Δημητριανοῦ κατ’ Ἀντιόχειαν τὸν βίον μεταλλάξαντος, τὴν ἐπισκοπὴν Παῦλος ὁ ἐκ Σαμοσάτων παραλαμβάνει.
 τούτου δὲ ταπεινὰ καὶ χαμαιπετῆ περὶ τοῦ χριστοῦ παρὰ τὴν ἐκκλησιαστικὴν διδασκαλίαν φρονήσαντος ὡς κοινοῦ τὴν φύσιν ἀνθρώπου committing downright solecisms.
 These there is no necessity to single out now.
 ForI have not said these things in mockery( let no one thinkit), but merely to establish the dissimilarity οf these” XXVI.
 In addition to these letters οf Dionysius there are extant aho many others, as for example those against Sabellius to Αmmon bishop of the church at Bernice, and that to Telesphorus, and that to Euphranor and Αmmon again and Εupοrus.
 Αnd he composed on the same subject aho four οther treatises, which he addressed to hisnamesakeat Rome, Dionvsius.
 Αnd we have many letters of his hesides these, and moreover lengthy books writtenin epistolary form, such as those on Νature, addressed toTimothy his boy, and that on Temptations, which also he defficated to Euphranor.
 In adffition to these, in writingalsoto Basilides, bishop of the communities inthe Pentapolis,he says that he himselfhad written an exposition of the beginningof Ecclesiastes;
 and he has left behind for our beneRt various other letters addressed to this person.
 so much for Dionysius.
 But come now, after recording these things, let us hand down for the infonnation of posterity the character οf our own generation.
 XXVII.
 when Xystus had presided οver the church of the Romans for eleven years, 1 he was succeeded by Dionysius, namesake of him of Αlexandria.
 Αt this time also when Demetrian had departed this life at Αntioch, Ρaul of samosata receivedthe Ρiscopate.
 Αs this person espoused low and mean riewsasto Christ, contraq to the’s teaching, namely, that Ηewasin His nature γενομένου, ὁ μὲν κατ’’ Ἀλεξάνδρειαν Διονύσιος παρακληθεὶς ὡς ἄν ἐπὶ τὴν σύνοδον ἀφίκοιτο, γῆρας ὁ μοῦ καὶ ἀσθένειαν τοῦ σώματος αἰτιασάμενος, ἀνατίθεται τὴν παρουσίαν, δι’ ἐπιστολῆς τὴν αὐτοῦ γνώμην, ἢν ἔχοι περὶ τοῦ ζητουμένου, παραστήσας, οἱ δὲ λοιποὶ τῶν ἐκκλησιῶν ποιμένες ἄλλος ἄλλοθεν ὡς ἐπὶ λυμεῶνα τῆς Χριστοῦ ποίμνης συνῄεσαν, οἱ πάντες ἐπὶ τὴν Ἀντιόχειαν σπεύδοντες.
 XXVIII.
 τούτων οἳ μάλιστα διέπρεπον, Φιρμιλιανὸς μὲν τῆς Καππαδοκῶν Καισαρείας ἐπίσκοπος Γρηγόριος δὲ καὶ Ἀθηνόδωρος ἀδελφοὶ τῶν κατὰ Πόντον παροικιῶν ποιμένες καὶ ἐπὶ τούτοις Ἕλενος τῆς ἐν Ταρσῷ παροικίας καὶ Νικομᾶς τῆς ἐν Ἰκονίῳ, οὐ μὴν ἀλλὰ καὶ τῆς ἐν ἰεροσολύμοις ἐκκλησίας Ὑμέναιος τῆς τε ὁμόρου ταύτης Καισαρείας Θεότεκνος, Μάξιμος ἔτι πρὸς τούτοις, τῶν κατὰ Βόστραν δὲ καὶ οὗτος ἀδελφῶν διαπρεπῶς ἡγεῖτο, μυρίους τε ἄλλους οὐκ ἂν' απορήσαι ἀπορήσαι τις ἅμα πρεσβυτέροις καὶ αὐτῆς ἕνεκεν αἰτίας ἐν τῆ προειρημένῃ πόλει συγκροτηθέντας ἀπαριθμούμενος, ἀλλὰ τούτων γε οἱ μάλιστα ἐπιφανεῖς οἵδε ἦσαν.
 πάντων οὖν κατὰ καιροὺς διαφόρως καὶ πολλάκις ἐπὶ ταὐτὸν συνιόντων, λόγοι καὶ ζητήσεις καθ’ ἑκάστην ἀνεκινοῦντο σύνοδον, τῶν μὲν ἀμφὶ τὸν Σαμοσατέα τὰ τῆς ἑτεροδοξίας ἐπικρύπτειν ἔτι καὶ παρακαλύπτεσθαι πειρωμένων, τῶν δὲ ἀπογυμνοῦν καὶ εἰς φανερὸν ἄγειν τὴν αἵρεσιν καὶ τὴν εἰς χριστὸν βλασθημίαν αὐτοῦ διὰ σπουδῆς ποιουμένων.
 Ἐν τούτω δὲ Διονύσιος τελευτᾶ κατὰ τὸ δωδέκατον τῆς Γαλλιηνοῦ βασιλείας, προστὰς τῆς an ordinary man, Dionysius of Alexandria was inrited to attend the synod, but, pleaffing as his excuse both old age and boffily weakness, hepostponedhis coming,and furnished by letter the opinion that he heldon the subjectin question.
 But the rest of the pastorsofthe churches,from various quarters, all hastedto Αntioch,and assembled as againsta spoiler ofthe nock οf christ.
 XXVIII.
 Αmong those who were the mortdistinguished were Firmilian, bishop of Caesarea Cappadocia;
 the brothers Gregory and Athenodore, pastors of the communities in Pontus;
 and in addition to these, Helenus, bishopof community at Tarsus,and Nicomas,of the community at Iconium nor mustwe omit Hymenaeus, of the church at Jemsalem, and neotecnus, of this neighbouring church of Caesarea;
 and moreover there was aho, who was ruling with distinction the brethren at Bostra;
 and one would not be at a loss to reckonup countless others, together withpresbyters and deacons, who were gathered together in the abovementioned city for the same cause.
 But these were the most famous among them.
 when all, then, were coming together frequently οn different oecasions, argmnents and questions were mooted at each meeting, the samosateneandhis party attempting to keep still concealed and to cloak what was heterodox, while the οthers were eamestly engaged in laying bare and bringing into the open his heresy and blasphemy against Christ.
 Αt that time Dionysius died in the tweKth year οf the reign οf Gallienus, 1 haring presidedinthe epis- κατ’ Ἀλεξάνδρειαν ἐπισκοπῆς ἔτεσιν ἑπτακαίδεκα, διαδέχεται δ’ αὐτὸν Μάξιμος.
 Γαλλιηνοῦ δ’ ἐφ’ ὅλοις ἐνιαυτοῖς πεντεκαίδεκαἴ’ τὴν ἀρχὴν κεκρατηκότος, Κλαύδιος κατέστη διάδοχος.
 Δεύτερον οὗτος διελθὼν ἔτος Αύρηλιανῷ μεταδίδωσι τὴν ἡγεμονίαν·
 XXIX.
 καθ’ ὃν τελευταίας συγκροτηθείσης πλείστων ὅσων ἐπισκόπων συνόδου, καὶ πρὸς ἁπάντων ἤδη σαφῶς καταγνωσθεὶς ἑτεροδοξίαν ὁ τῆς κατὰ Ἀντιόχειαν αἱρέσεως ἀρχηγὸς τῆς ὑπὸ τὸν οὐρανὸν καθολικῆς ἐκκλησίας ἀποκηρύττεται.
 μάλιστα δ’ αὐτὸν εὐθύνας ἐπικρυπτόμενον διήλεγξεν Μαλχίων, ἀνὴρ τά τε ἄλλα λόγιος καὶ σοφιστοῦ τῶν ἐπ’ Ἀντιοχείας παιδευτηρίων διατριβῆς προεστώς, οὐ μὴν ἀλλὰ καὶ δι’ ὑπερβάλλουσαν τῆς εἰς χριστὸν πίστεως γνησιότητα πρεσβυτερίου τῆς αὐτόθι παροικίας ἠξιωμένος·
 οὗτός γέ τοι ἐπισημειουμένων ταχυγράφων ζήτησιν πρὸς αὐτὸν ἐνστησάμενος, ἢν καὶ εἰς δεῦρο φερομένην ἴομεν, μόνος ἴσχυσεν τῶν ἄλλων κρυψίνουν ὄντα καὶ ἀπατηλὸν φωρᾶσαι τὸν ἄνθρωπον.
 XXX.
 Μίαν δὴ οὖν ἐκ κοινῆς γνώμης οἱ ἐπὶ ταὐτὸν συγκεκροτημένοι ποιμένες διαχαράξαντες ἐπιστολὴν εἰς πρόσωπον τοῦ τε' Ρωμαίων ἐπισκόπου Διονυσίου καὶ Μαξίμου τοῦ κατ’ Ἀλεξάνδρειαν ἐπὶ πάσας διαπέμπονται τὰς ἐπαρχίας, τὴν αὐτῶν τε σπουδὴν τοῖς πᾶσιν φανερὰν καθιστάντες καὶ τοῦ Παύλου τὴν διάστροφον ἑτεροδοξίαν, ἐλέγχους τε καὶ ἐρωτήσεις ἃς πρὸς αὐτὸν ἄνα·
 κεκινήκασιν, καὶ ἔτι τὸν πάντα βίον τε καὶ τρόπον τοῦ ἀνδρὸς διηγούμενοι·
 ἐξ ὧν μνήμης ἕνεκεν copate at Alexandria for seventeen years.
 years.
 He was succeededby Maximus.
 Gallienus having held the prineipate for fifteen entire years, Claudius was established as his successor.
 1 When he had completedhis second year, he gac over the gOVernment to Aurelian.
 XXIX.
 Ιn Aurelian's daya final synodofan ofexceedingly large numberofbishops Was assembled, and theleader ofthe heresy at Antioch, being unmaskedand now cleariy condemnedofheterodoxy by all, was excommunicated from the Catholich Church under heaven.
 The person foremost in calling him to account and in utterly refuting his attempts atconcealmentwas Malchion,a learned man, who ahowas head ofasehool of rhetoric, one ofthe Greek educational establihments at Antioch;
 and, moreoVer,for the surpassing sincerity of his faith in Christ he had been deemed worthy of the presbyterate of that community.
 Ιn faet, this man had stenographers to take notes as he heldadisputatiOn with Ρaul, wllich we know to be eXtant even to tbis day;
 and he, alOne of them all, was able to unmask that erafty and deceitful person.
 XXX.
 The pastors, then, WhO had been assembled together, indited unanimouslya ringle letterpersonally to DiOnysius, bishop of ROme, and Maximus, of Alexandria, and sent it throughOut all the provinces.
 In it theymake manifest toau their zeal, and alsothe perverse heterodoxy of Ρaul, as wellasthe arguments and questions that they addressed to him;
 and moreover they deseribe the man’s whole lifeand eonduct.
 From Which, by way οf memOrial, it may καλῶς ἂν ἔχοι ταύτας αὐτῶν ἐπὶ τοῦ παρόντος διελθεῖν τὰς φωνάς·
 “ Διονυσίῳ καὶ Μαξίμῳ καὶ τοῖς κατὰ τὴν οἰκουμένην πᾶσιν αυλλειτουργοῖς ἡμῶν ἐπισκόποις καὶ πρεσβυτέροις καὶ διακόνοις καὶ πάσῃ τῆ ὑπὸ τὸν οὐρανὸν καθολικῇ ἐκκλησίᾳ Ἕλενος καὶ Ὑμέναιος καὶ Θεόφιλος καὶ Θεότεκνος καὶ Μάξιμος Πρόκλος Νικομᾶς καὶ Αἰλιανὸς καὶ Παῦλος καὶ Βωλανὸς καὶ Πρωτογενὴς καὶ Ἱέραξ καὶ Εὐτύχιος καὶ Θεόδωρος καὶ Μαλχίων καὶ Λούκιος καὶ οἱ λοιποὶ πάντες οἱ σὺν ἡμῖν παροικοῦντες τὰς ἐγγὺς πόλεις καὶ ἔθνη ἐπίσκοποι καὶ πρεσβύτεροι καὶ διάκονοι καὶ αἱ ἐκκλησίαι τοῦ θεοῦ ἀγαπητοῖς ἀδελφοῖς ἐν κυρίῳ χαίρειν.
" τούτοις μετὰ βραχέα ἐπιλέγουσιν ταῦτα·
 “ ἐπεστέλλομεν δὲ ἅμα καὶ παρεκαλοῦμεν πολλοὺς καὶ τῶν μακρὰν ἐπισκόπων ἐπὶ τὴν θεραπείαν τῆς θανατηφόρου διδασκαλίας, ὥσπερ καὶ Διονύσιον τὸν ἐπὶ τῆς Ἀλεξανδρείας καὶ Φιρμιλιανὸν τὸν ἀπὸ τῆς Καππαδοκίας, τοὺς μακαρίτας·
 ὧν δ’ μὲν καὶ ἐπέστειΛεν εἰς τὴν Ἀντιόχειαν, τὸν ἡγεμόνα τῆς πλάνης οὐδὲ προσρήσεως ἀξιώσας οὐδὲ πρὸς πρόσωπον γραφὰς αὐτῷ, ἀλλὰ τῆ παροικίᾳ πάση, ἧς καὶ τὸ ἀντίγραφον ὑπετάξαμεν·
 ὁ δὲ Φιρμιλιανός, καὶ δὶς ἀφικόμενος, κατέγνω μὲν τῶν ὑπ’ ἐκείνου καινοτομουμένων, μένων, ὡς ἴσμεν καὶ μαρτυροῦμεν οἱ παραγενόμενοι καὶ ἄλλοι πολλοὶ συνίσασιν, ἐπαγγειλαμένου δὲ μεταθήσεσθαι, πιστεύσας καὶ ἐλπίσας ἄνευ τινὸς περὶ τὸν λόγον λοιδορίας τὸ πρᾶγμα εἰς δέον καταστήσεσθαι, ἀνεβάλετο, παρακρουσθεὶς ὑπὸ τοῦ καὶ τὸν θεὸν τὸν ἑαυτοῦ καὶ κύριον ἀρνουμένου καὶ τὴν πίστιν, be well on the Ρresent oecasion to give an account of these their utteranees.
“ To Dionysiusand Maximus andto all Our fellowministersthroughout the worid, bishops,presbyters and deacons, and tothe whole Catholic Chureh under heaven, Helenus and Ηymenaeus and Theophilus Theotecnus and Maximus, Ρroclus, Νicomas and Aelianus and Ρaul and Bolanus and Protogenes and Hierax and Eutychius and Theodore and Μalchion and Lueius and all the otherS who, with us, sojourn in the adjacentcitiesand provinces, bishops and preSbyters and deaeOns and the ehurcheS of God, aS to brethren beloved in the Lord send greeting.
” Α little further on they proeeed thus:
“ Αnd we wrote1inviting many even of the bishops at a distance to eome and heal this deadly doctrine, as for example, both DionySius at Alexandria and Firmihan of Cappadoeia, those blessed men.
 The former of these wrote to Antioch, not tothe bishop, neither deeming the leader of the heresy worthy of being addressed nor writing to him personally, but to the whole community;
 of which letter also We subjoina copy.
 Firmilian, on theother hand,even came twice, and eondemned Paul's new- fangled ideas, as wewho were Ρresent know and bear Witness, and many others knoW aS well;
 but, on his promising to ehange, he adjourned the proceedings, hoping and believing that the matter would be Bttingly eoncluded ithout any reproach to the Word;
 for he WaS deeeived by him who both denied hisGodand Lord, and also did not ἢν καὶ αὐτὸς πρότερον εἶχεν, μὴ φυλάξαντος.
 ἔμελλεν δὲ καὶ νῦν ὁ Φιρμιλιανὸς εἰς τὴν Ἀντιόχειαν διαβήσεσθαι καὶ μέχρι γε Ταρσῶν ἧκεν, ἅτε τῆς ἀρνησιθέου κακίας αὐτοῦ πεῖραν εἰληφώς·
 ἀλλὰ γὰρ μεταξύ, συνεληλυθότων ἡμῶν καὶ καλούντων καὶ ἀναμενόντων, ἄχρι ἄν ἔλθῃ, τέλος ἔσχεν τοῦ βίου.
" Μεθ’ ἕτεραδ’ αὖθις τὸν βίον τοῦ αὐτοῦ οἵας ἐτύγχανεν ἀγωγῆς, διαγράφουσιν ἐν τούτοις.
“ ὅπου δὲ ἀποστὰς τοῦ κανόνος, ἐπὶ κίβδηλα καὶ νόθα διδάγματα μετελήλυθεν, οὐδὲν δεῖ τοῦ ἔξω ὄντος τὰς πράξεις κρίνειν, οὐδ’ ὅτι πρότερον πένης ὢν καὶ πτωχὸς καὶ μήτε παρὰ πατέρων παραλαβὼν εὐπορίαν μήτε ἐκ τέχνης ἤ τινος ἐπιτηδεύματος κτησάμενος, νῦν εἰς ὑπερβάλλοντα πλοῦτον ἐλήλακεν ἐξ ἀνομιῶν καὶ ἱεροσυλιῶν καὶ ὧν αἰτεῖ καὶ σείει τοὺς ἀδελφούς, καταβραβεύων τοὺς ἀδικουμένους καὶ ὑπισχνούμενος βοηθήσειν μισθοῦ, ψευδόμενος δὲ καὶ τούτους καὶ μάτην καρπούμενος τὴν τῶν ἐν πράγμασιν ὄντων ἑτοιμότητα τὸ διδόναι ὑπὲρ ἀπαλλαγῆς τῶν ἐνοχλούντων, πορισμὸν ἡγούμενος τὴν θεοσέβειαν.
 οὔτε ὡς φρονεῖ φρονεῖ καὶ ὑπερῆρται, κοσμικὰ ἀξιώματα ὑποδυόμενος καὶ δουκηνάριος μᾶλλον ἢ ἐπίσκοπος θέλων καλεῖσθαι καὶ σομβῶν κατὰ τὰς ἀγορὰς καὶ ἐπιστολὰς ἀναγινώσκων καὶ ὑπαγορεύων ἅμα βαδίζων δημοσίᾳ καὶ δορυφορούμενος, τῶν μὲν προπορευομένων, τῶνδ’ ἐφεπομένων, πολλῶν τὸν ἀριθμόν, ὡς καὶ τὴν πίστιν φθονεῖσθαι preserVe the faith that he himself formeriy held.
 Αnd Firmilian was now again on his way to erossoverto Αntioch,and had got asfar as Tarsus, for he had had eVerience of the Villainyof this denierof God.
 But while we had come together and were actually calling him and awaiting his arrival, in the midst ofit all he leaehed life's end.
” Αgain, after other remarks they describe the manner of his life, in the fOllowing terms:
“ But he departedfrom the canOn of truth, and has turned aside to spurious and bastard doetrines, we are under no obligation to judge the actions of him that without,not even because, though he vas fOrmerly poor and penniless, neither haVing reeeived a livelihoos from hiS fathers nor having got it from a trade or any oeeupation, he has has come to possess abundant wealth, as a result of lawless deeds and sacrilegious plunderings and extortions exacted from the brethren by threats;
 for he deprives the injured of their rights, and promisesto help themfor money,yet breaks his word with these also,and witha light heart makes his harvest out of the readiness of persons engaged in lawsuits to make an offer, for the sake of being rid of those that trouble them;
 seeing that he considers that godlinessisa way of gain.
 Νeither do we judgehim beeause he sets his mind on high things and is lifted up, clothing himself with wordly honours and wishing to be ealled ducenarius1 rather than bishop, and struts in the market- places,2 reading and dictating lettersas he walksin public,and attendedbya bodyguard,some preceding,some following, and that too in numbers:
 with the result καὶ μισεῖσθαι διὰ τὸν ὄγκον αὐτοῦ καὶ τὴν ὑπερηφανίαν τῆς καρδίας·
 οὔτε τὴν ἐν ταῖς ἐκκλησιαστικαῖς συνόδοις τερατείαν, ἢν μηχανᾶται, δοξοκοπῶν καὶ φαντασιοκοπῶν καὶ τὰς τῶν ἀκεραιοτέρων ψυχὰς τοῖς τοιούτοις ἐκπλήττων, βῆμα μὲν καὶ θρόνον ἑαυτῷ ἑαυτῷ κατασκευασάμενος, οὐχ ὡς Χριστοῦ μαθητής, σήκρητόν τε, ὥσπερ οἱ τοῦ κόσμου ἄρχοντες, ἔχων τε καὶ ὀνομάζων, παίων τε τῆ χειρὶ τὸν μηρὸν καὶ τὸ βῆμα ἀράττων τοῖς ποσὶν καὶ τοῖς μὴ ἐπαινοῦσιν μηδὲ ὥσπερ ἐν τοῖς θεάτροις κατασείουσιν ταῖς ὀθόναις μηδ’ ἐκβοῶσίν τε καὶ ἀναπηδῶσιν κατὰ τὰ αὐτὰ τοῖς ἀμφ’ αὐτὸν στασιώταις, ἀνδράσιν τε καὶ γυναίοις, ἀκόσμως οὕτως ἀκροωμένοις, τοῖς δ’ οὗν ὡς ἐν οἴκῳ θεοῦ σεμνοπρεπῶν καὶ εὐτάκτως ἀκούουσιν ἐπιτιμῶν καὶ ἐνυβρίζων καὶ εἰς τοὺς ἀπελθόντας ἐκ τοῦ βίου τούτου παροινῶν ἐξηγητὰς τοῦ λόγου φορτικῶς ἐν τῷ κοινῷ καὶ μεγαλορημονῶν περὶ ἑαυτοῦ, καθάπερ οὐκ ἐπίσκοπος ἀλλὰ σοφιστὴς καὶ γόης·
 ψαλμοὺς δὲ τοὺς μὲν εἰς τὸν κύριον ἡμῶν Ἰησοῦν Χριστὸν παύσας ὡς δὴ νεωτέρους καὶ νεωτέρων ἀνδρῶν συγγράμματα, εἰς ἑαυτὸν δὲ ἐν μέσῃ τῇ ἐκκλησίᾳ τῆ μεγάλη τοῦ πάσχα ἡμέρᾳ ψαλμῳδεῖν γυναῖκας παρασκευάζων, ὧν καὶ ἀκούσας ἄν τις φρίξειεν·
 οἷα καὶ τοὺς θωπεύοντας αὐτὸν ἐπισκόπους τῶν ὁμόρων ἀγρῶν τε καὶ πόλεων καὶ πρεσβυτέρους ἐν ταῖς πρὸς τὸν λαὸν ὁμιλίαις καθίησιν διαλέγεσθαι·
 τὸν μὲν γὰρ υἱὸν τοῦ θεοῦ οὐ βούλεται συνομολογεῖν ἐξ οὐρανοῦ κατεληλυθέναι( ἵνα that the faith is ill thoughtof and hated because of his conceit and the overweening pride of his heart.
 Nor do we judge the quackeryin church assembliesthathe derises, courting popularityand posing forappearance’ sake, and thus astonishing the minds the simpler folk, with the tribunal and lofty throne that hepreparedfor himself,not beRttingadisciple οf Christ, and thesecretum1 which, in imitation οf the rulers οf the world, he has andso styles.
 Αlsο, he smites his hand on his thigh and stamps the tribunal with his feet;
 and those who do not applaud οrwave their handkerchiefs, as ina theatre,or shout οut and jump up in the same way as do the men and mtched women who are his partixans and hearken in this disorderly fashion, but who listen, as in God's house, with orderlyand becoming reverence,— these he rebukes and insults.
 Αnd towards the interpreters οf the word who have departed this life he behaves in an insolentand ill- bred fashion in the common assembly, and brags about himself as though he werc not a bishop buta sophist and charlatan.
 Αnd as to psalms, he puta stop to those addressed to our Lord Jesus christ, on the ground that they are modem and the compositions of modem men, but he trains women to sing hymns to himseK in the middle of the church οn the great day of the Ρascha, which would make οne shudder to hear.
 such aho is the kind of discourse that he permitsthe bishops of the neighbouring country and towns, who fawn upon him, and thepresbyters as well, to deliver in their sennons to the people.
 For he is not willing to ackowledge with us that the son of ood has come down from heaven προλαβόντες τῶν μελλόντων γραφήσεσθαι θῶμεν, καὶ τοῦτο οὐ λόγῳ ψιλῷ ῥηθήσεται, ἀλλ’ ἐξ ὧν ἐπέμψαμεν ὑπομνημάτων δείκνυται πολλαχόθεν, οὐχ ἥκιστα δὲ ὅπου λέγει Ἰησοῦν Χριστὸν κάτωθεν), οἱ δὲ εἰς αὐτὸν ψάλλοντες καὶ ἐγκωμιάζοντες ἐν τῷ λαῷ ἄγγελον τὸν ἀσεβῆ διδάσκαλον ἑαυτῶν ἐξ οὐρανοῦ κατεληλυθέναι λέγουσιν, καὶ ταῦτα οὐ κωλύει, ἀλλὰ καὶ λεγομένοις πάρεστιν ὁ ὑπερήφανος·
 τὰς δὲ συνεισάκτους αὐτοῦ γυναῖκας, ὡς Ἀντιοχεῖς ὀνομάζουσιν, καὶ τῶν περὶ αὐτὸν πρεσβυτέρων καὶ διακόνων, οἷς καὶ τοῦτο καὶ τὰ ὤα ἁμαρτήματα ἀνίατα ὄντα συγκρύπτει, συνειδὼς καὶ ἐλέγξας, ὅπως αὐτοὺς ὑπόχρεως ἔχῃ, περὶ ὧν λόγοις καὶ ἔργοις ἀδικεῖ, μὴ τολμῶντας κατηγορεῖν τῷ καθ’ ἑαυτοὺς φόβῳ, ἀλλὰ καὶ πλουσίους ἀπέφηνεν, ἐφ’ ᾧ πρὸς τῶν τὰ τοιαῦτα ζηλούντων φιλεῖται καὶ θαυμάζεται— τί ἂν ταῦτα γράφοιμεν;
 ἐπιστάμεθα δέ, ἀγαπητοί, ὅτι τὸν ἐπίσκοπον καὶ τὸ ἱερατεῖον ἅπαν παράδειγμα εἶναι δεῖ τῷ πλήθει πάντων καλῶν ἔργων, καὶ οὐδὲ ἐκεῖνο ἀγνοοῦμεν ὅσοι ὑπὸ τοῦ συνεισάγειν ἑαυτοῖς γυναῖκας ἐξέπεσον, οἳδ’ ὑπωπτεύθησαν, ὥστ’ εἰ καὶ δοίη τις αὐτῷ τὸ μηδὲν ἀσελγὲς ποιεῖν, ἀλλὰ τήν γε ὑπόνοιαν τὴν ἐκ τοῦ τοιούτου πράγματος φυομένην ἐχρῆν εὐλαβηθῆναι, μή τινα σκανδαλίσῃ, τοὺς δὲ καὶ μιμεῖσθαι προτρέψῃ.
 πῶς γὰρ ἂν ἐπιπλήξειεν ἢ νουθετήσειεν ἕτερον μὴ συγκαταβαίνειν ἐπὶ πλέον εἰς ταὐτὸν γυναικί, μὴ ὀλίσθῃ, φυλαττόμενον, ὡς γέγραπται, ὅστις( to anticipate something οf what weareabout to write;
 and this will not be merely asSerted,but is proved from many passages of the notes thatwe send,and not least where he says that Jesus Christ is from below1);
 while they who sing psalms to him and utter his praisesin the congregation say that their impious teacher has come down an angel from heaven.
 Αnd he doesnot prevent this, but is even present when sueh things are said, arrogant fellow that he is.
 Αnd as to the subintroductae, 2 as the Antiochenes call them, his own and those of the presbyters and deacoss in his company, with whom he joins in concealing both this and the other incurable sins( though he knowsof,and has convicted, them), that hemayhave them underobligationto him, and that theymaynot dare, through fearfor themselves, to aecuse him οf his misdemeanours in word and deed;
 yea, he has even made them rich, for which cause he is the beloved and amnired of those who affect such conduct — why should we write of these things? But we knoW, beloved, that the bishop and the priesthood as a whole Should be a pattem to the people of all good works;
 and we are not ignorant οf this:
 how many have fallen through procuring subintroductae for themselVes, while οthers are under suspieion;
 so that evenif it be granted thathedoes nothing licentious, yet he ought at least to guard againstthe suspicion that arises fromsucha practice, lest he cause someone to stumble, and induce οthers alsoto imitate him.
 For how could he rebuke another, οr counsel him not to consort any further witha woman and so guard againsta slip, as it is written, seeing thathe has μίαν μὲν ἀπέστησεν ἤδη, δύο δὲ ἀκμαζούσας καἰ εὐπρεπεῖς τὴν ὄφιν ἔχει μεθ’ ἑαυτοῦ, κάν ἀπίη που, συμπεριφέρει, καὶ ταῦτα τρυφῶν καὶ ὑπερεμπιμπλάμενος;
 ὧν ἕνεκα στενάζουσι μὲν καὶ ὀδύπονται πάντες καθ’ ἑαυτούς, οὕτω δὲ τὴν τυραννίδα καὶ δυναστείαν αὐτοῦ πεφόβηνται, ὥστε κατηγορεῖν μὴ τολμᾶν.
 ἀλλὰ ταῦτα μέν, ὡς προειρήκαμεν, εὔθυνεν ἄν τις ἄνδρα τὸ γοῦν φρόνημα καθολικὸν ἔχοντα καὶ συγκαταριθμούμενον ἡμῖν, τὸνδ’ ἐξορχησάμενον τὸ μυστήριον καὶ ἐμπομεπεύσαντα τῆ μιαρᾷ αἱρέσει τῇ Ἀρτεμᾶ( τί γὰρ οὐ χρὴ μόλις τὸν πατέρα αὐτοῦ δηλῶσαι;
) οὐδὲν δεῖν ἡγούμεθα τούτων τοὺς λογισμοὺς ἀπαιτεῖν.
" Εἶτ᾿ ἐπὶ τέλει τῆς ἐπιστολῆς ταῦτ᾿ ἐπιλέγουσιν.
 ἠναγκάσθημεν οὖν ἀντιτασσόμενον αὐτὸν τῷ θεῷ καὶ μὴ εἴκοντα ἐκκηρύξαντες, ἕτερον ἀντ’ αὐτοῦ τῇ καθολικῇ ἐκκλησίᾳ καταστῆσαι ἐπίσκοοπον, θεοῦ προνοίᾳ ὡς πεπείσμεθα, τὸν τοῦ μακαρίου Δημητριανοῦ καὶ ἐπιφανῶς προστάντος πρὸ τούτου τῆς αὐτῆς παροικίας υἱὸν Δόμνον, ἅπασιν τοῖς πρέπουσιν ἐπισκόπῳ καλοῖς κεκοσμημένον, ἐδηλώσαμέν τε ὑμῖν, ὅπως τούτῳ γράφητε καὶ παρὰ τούτου τὰ κοινωνικὰ δέχησθε γράμματα·
 τῷ δὲ Ἀρτεμᾷ οὗτος ἐπιστελλέτω καὶ οἱ τὰ Αρτεμᾶ φρονοῦντες τούτῳ κοινωνείτωσαν.
" Τοῦ δὴ οὗν Παύλου σὺν καὶ τῇ τῆς πίστεως ὀρθοδοξίᾳ τῆς ἐπισκοπῆς ἀποπεπτωκότος, Δόμνος, ὡς εἴρηται, τὴν λειτουργίαν τῆς κατὰ Ἀντιόχειαν ἐκκλησίας διεδέξατο·
 ἀλλὰ γὰρ μηδαμῶς ἐκστῆναι τοῦ Παύλου τοῦ τῆς ἐκκλησίας οἴκου θέλοντος, sent οne away already, and has two in his companyinthe Rower of youthand beauty, and even if he go awayanywhere, he brings themaround with him, living all the while in luXuryandsurfeiting? Wherefore, though all groan and lament in private, so fearful have they become of his tyrannyand poWer, that they dare not aeeuse him.
 Vet, as We have said before,1 οne might callto aecount for these mattersa man who has at any ratea catholic mind and is numbered along with us;
 but as for one Who burlesqued the myStery, and strutted about in the abominable heresy of Artemas 2( for why shouldwe not bring ourselvesto declare his father?)— from sucha one we think that weare under no obligation to demanda reckoning for these things.
 ” Then at theclose οf the letterthey add as follows:
“ We were compelledtherefore, aS he opposed himself to God andrefusedto yield,to excommunicate him,and appoint another bishopin his steadfor the Catholic Chureh choosingby the providenceof God, as we are persuaded, Domnus the son of the blessed Demetrian, who formerly presided with distinction over the same community;
 he is adornedwithall the noble qualities suitable fora bishop,and we notify this his appointment unto you that yemaywrite to him,and from him receive lettersof communion.
 But let this fellow write to Artemas, and let those who side with Αrtemas hold communion with him.
” When Ρaul, then, had fallen from the episcopate as well as from his orthodoxy in the faith, Domnus,ashas been said, sueceeded to the ministry of the chureh at Αntioch.
 But as Ρaul refused on an any account to give up possession οf the church- building, βασιλεὺς ἐντευχθεὶς Αὐρηλιανὸς αἰσιώτατα περὶ τοῦ πρακτέου διείληφεν, τούτοις νεῖμαι προστάττων τὸν οἶκον, οἷς ἂν οἱ κατὰ τὴν Ἰταλίαν καὶ τὴν‘ Ρωμαίων πόλιν ἐπίσκοποι τοῦ δόγματος ἐπιστέλλοιεν.
 οὕτω δῆτα ὁ προδηλωθεὶς ἀνὴρ μετὰ τῆς ἐσχάτης αἰσχύνης ὑπὸ τῆς κοσμικῆς ἀρχῆς ἐξελαύνεται τῆς ἐκκλησίας.
 τοιοῦτος μέν γέ τις ἢν τὸ τηνικάδε περὶ ἡμᾶς ὁ Αὐρηλιανός, προϊούσης δ’ αὐτῷ τῆς ἀρχῆς ἀλλοῖόν τι περὶ ἡμῶν φρονήσας, ἤδη τισὶν βουλαῖς, ὡς ἂν διωγμὸν καθ’ ἡμῶν ἐγείρειεν, ἀνεκινεῖτο, πολύς τε ἦν ὁ παρὰ πᾶσιν περὶ τούτου λόγος·
 μέλλοντα δὲ ἤδη καὶ σχεδὸν εἰπεῖν τοῖς καθ’ ἡμῶν γράμμασιν ὑποσημειούμενον θεία μέτεισιν δίκη, μόνον οὐχὶ ἐξ ἀγκώνων τῆς ἐγχειρήσεως αὐτὸν ἀποδεσμοῦσα λαμπρῶς τε τοῖς πᾶσιν συνορᾶν παριστῶσα ὡς οὔποτε γένοιτ’ ἂν ῥᾳστώνη τοῖς τοῦ βίου ἄρχουσιν κατὰ τῶν τοῦ χριστοῦ ἐκκλησιῶν, μὴ οὐχὶ τῆς ὑπερμάχου χειρὸς θείᾳ καὶ οὐρανίῳ κρίσει παιδείας ἕνεκα καὶ ἐπιστροφῆς, καθ’ οὓς ἂν αὐτὴ δοκιμάζοι καιρούς, τοῦτ’ ἐπιτελεῖσθαι συγχωρούσης.
 ἔτεσι γοῦν ἓξ κρατήσαντα τὸν Αὐρηλιανὸν διαδέχεται Πρόβος, καὶ τοῦτον δέ που τοῖς ἴσοις ἐπικατασχόντα Κᾶρος παισὶν Καρίνῳ καὶ Νουμεριανω, πάλιν τ’ αὖ τούτων οὐδ’ ὅλοις τρισὶν ἐνιαυτοῖς διαγενομένων, μέτεισιν τὰ τῆς ἡγεμονίας Διοκλητιανὸν καὶ τοὺς μετ’ αὐτὸν εἰσποιηθέντας, ἐφ’ ὧν ὁ καθ’ ἡμᾶςthe emperor Aurelian,on being petitioned, gave an extremely just decision regarding the matter, order the assignment οf the building to those with hom the bishops of the doctrine1 in Italy and Rome should communicate in writting.
 Thus, then, was the aforesaid man driven with the utmost indignity from the church by the ruler of this world.
 such indeed was the disposition οf Aurelian towards us at that time.
 But as his reign advanced, he changed his mind with regard to us, and was now being moved by certain counsels to stir up persecution against us;
 and there was great talk about this on all sides.
 But as he was just οn the point οf so doing and was putting, one might almost say, his signature to the decrees against us, the divine Justice visited him, and pinionedhis arms,so to speak, to preventhis undertaking.
 Thus it was clearly shown for all to see that the rulers of this world would never find it easy to proeeed against the churches of Christ, unless the hand which champions us were to permit this to be done, as a divine and heavenly judgement to chasten and turn us, at whatsoever times it should approve.
 At all events, when Aurelian had reignedr six years, 2 he was suceeeded by Ρrobus.
 Ηe helde government for something likethe same number οf years, 3 and Carus withhis sons Carinus and Numerianus succeeded him;
 and when they in their turn had remained in office for not three entire years, the government devolved on Diocletian4 and οn those who were brought in after him;
 and under them was συντελεῖται διωγμὸς καὶ ἢ κατ’ αὐτὸν τῶν ἐκκλησιῶν καθαίρεσις.
 Ἀλλὰ γὰρ μικρῷ τούτου πρότερον τὸν ἐπὶ Ῥώμης ἐπίσκοπον Διονύσιον ἔτεσιν ἐννέα διελθόντα τὴν λειτουργίαν διαδέχεται Φῆλιξ.
 XXXI.
 Ἐν τούτω καὶ ὁ μανεὶς τὰς φρένας ἐπώνυμός τε τῆς δαιμονώσης αἱρέσεως τὴν τοῦ λογισμοῦ παρατροπὴν καθωπλίζετο, τοῦ δαίμονος, αὐτοῦ δὴ τοῦ θεομάχου σατανᾶ, ἐπὶ λύμῃ πολλῶν τὸν ἄνδρα προβεβλημένου.
 βάρβαρος δῆτα τὸν βίον αὐτῷ λόγῳ καὶ τρόπῳ τήν τε φύσιν δαιμονικός τις ὢν καὶ μανιώδης, ἀκόλουθα τούτοις ἐγχειρῶν, Χριστὸν αὑτὸν μορφάζεσθαι ἐπειρᾶτο, τοτὲ μὲν τὸν τὸν παράκλητον καὶ αὐτὸ τὸ πνεῦμα τὸ ἅγιον αὐτὸς ἑαυτὸν ἀνακηρύττων καὶ τυφούμενός γε ἐπὶ τῆ μανίᾳ, τοτὲ δέ, οἷα χριστός, μαθητὰς δώδεκα κοινωνοὺς τῆς καινοτομίας αἱρούμενος·
 δόγματά γε μὴν ψευδῆ καὶ ἄθεα ἐκ μυρίων τῶν πρόπαλαι ἀπεσβηκότων ἀθέων αἱρέσεων συμπεφορημένα καττύσας, ἐκ τῆς Περσῶν ἐπὶ τὴν καθ’ ἡμᾶς οἰκουμένην ὥσπερ τινὰ θανατηφόρον ἰὸν ἐξωμόρξατο, ἀφ’ οὗ δὴ τὸ Μανιχαίων δυσσεβὲς ὄνομα τοῖς πολλοῖς εἰς ἔτι νῦν ἐπιπολάζει.
 τοιαύτη μὲν οὖν ἢ καὶ τῆσδε τῆς ψευδωνύμου γνώσεως ὑπόθεσις, κατὰ τοὺς δεδηλωμένους ὑποφυείσης χρόνους.
 XXXII.
 Καθ᾿ οὓς Φήλικα τῆς‘ Ρωμαίων πρὸ·
 στάντα ἐκκλησίας ἔτεσιν πέντε Εὐτυχιανὸς δία·
 οὐδ’ ὅλοις δὲ μησὶν οὗτος δέκα διαγενόμενος, Γαΐῳ τῷ καθ’ ἡμᾶς καταλείπει τὸν κλῆρον·
 καὶ τούτου δὲ ἀμφὶ τά πεντεκαίδεκα ἔτη πρὸ·
 accomplished the persecution of our day and the estruction οf the churches therein.
 But a shorttime before this, Felix succeededinthe ministry Dionysius, bishop of Rome, who had completed nine years.
 XXXI.
 Αt that time alsothe madman,1 named his devil- possessed heresy, was taking as his armour mental delusion;
 for the devil, that is Satan himself, the adversary of God, had put the man forward for the destruction of many.
 Ηis very speech and manners proclaimed him a barbarian in mode of life, and, being by nature devilish and insane, he suited his endeavours thereto and attempted to poseas Christ:
 at one time giving out that he wasthe Paraclete and the Ηolyspirit Himself,conceited fool that he was, as well as mad;
 at another time choosing, as Christ did, twelve disciples as associates in his new- fangled system.
 In short, he stitched together false and godless doctrines that he had collected from the countless, long- extinct, godless heresies, and infected οur empire with, as it were,a deadly poison that came from the land of the Ρersians;
d from himtheprofane name of Manichaean is still commonly on men's lips to this day.
 Such, then, was the foundation on which rested this knowledge which is falsely so called, which sprang up at thee we have mentioned.
 XXXII.
 At that time Felix, who had presided over the church οf the Romans for five years, was sucededby Eutychianus.
 This person did notr even ten entire months;
 he left the office to aius our contemporary.
 Αnd when he had presided στάντος, Μαρκελλῖνος κατέστη διάδοχος, ὃν καὶ αὐτὸν ὁ διωγμὸς κατείληφεν.
 Κατὰ τούσδε τῆς Ἀντιοχέων ἐπιακοπῆς μετὰ Δόμνον ἡγήσατο Τίμαιος, ὃν ὁ καθ’ ἡμᾶς διεδέξατο Κύριλλος·
 καθ’ ὃν Δωρόθεον, πρεσβείου τοῦ κατὰ Ἀντιόχειαν ἠξιωμένον, λόγιον ἄνδρα ἔγνωμεν.
 φιλόκαλος δ᾿ οὗτος περὶ τὰ θεῖα γεγονώς, καὶ τῆς Ἑβραίων ἐπεμελήθη γλώττης, ὡς καὶ αὐταῖς ταῖς Ἑβραϊκαῖς γραφαῖς ἐπιστημόνως ἐντυγχάνειν.
 ἦν δ᾿ οὗτος τῶν μάλιατα ἐλευθερίων προπαιδείας τε τῆς καθ’ Ἕλληνας οὐκ ἄμοιρος, τὴν φύσιν δὲ ἄλλως εὐνοῦχος, οὕτω πεφυκὼς ἐξ αὐτῆς γενέαεως, ὡς καὶ βααιλέα διὰ τοῦτο, οἷόν τι παράδοξον, αὐτὸν οἰκειώσασθαι καὶ τιμῆσαί γε ἐπιτροπῇ τῆς κατὰ Τύρον ἁλουργοῦ βαφῆς.
 τούτου μετρίως τὰς γραφὰς ἐπὶ τῆς ἐκκληαίας διηγουμένου κατηκούααμεν.
 Μετὰ δὲ Κύριλλον Τύραννος τῆς Ἀντιοχέων παροικίας τὴν ἐπισκοπὴν διεδέξατο, καθ’ ὃν ἤκμασεν ἡ τῶν ἐκκληαιῶν πολιορκία.
 τῆς δ᾿ ἐν Λαοδικείᾳ παροικίας ἡγήσατο μετὰ Σωκράτην Eὐσέβιος, ἀπὸ τῆς ἈΑεξανδρέων ὁρμηθεὶς πόλεως·
 αἰτία δ᾿ αὐτῷ τῆς μεταναστάσεως ὑπῆρξεν ἡ κατὰ τὸν Παῦλον ὑπόθεσις, δι’ ὃν τῆς Συρίας ἐπιβάς, πρὸς τῶν τῇδε περὶ τὰ θεῖα ἐσπουδακότων τῆς οἴκαδε πορείας εἴργεται, ἐπέραστόν τι θεοσεβείας χρῆμα τῶν καθ’ ἡμᾶς γεν̔̀ ὡς καὶ ἀπὸ τῶν προπαρατεθεισῶν Διονυσίου φωνῶν διαγνῶναι ῥᾴδιον.
 Ἀνατόλιος αὐτῷ διάδοχὸς, ἀγαθός, φασίν, ἀγαθοῦ, καθίσταται, γένος abοut fifteen years, Marcellinus wasappointedhis successor, the same whοm the persecutiοn has overtaken.
 In the timeofthese persons, in suecession to Domnus, Timaeus was in charge of the episeopate of Antioch, whom our contemporary Cyril succeeded.
 During Cyril 's episcopate we came to know Dorotheus,a leamed man, who had been deemed worthy of the presbyterate at Αntioeh.
 In his zeal for all that is beautifulin divine things, he made so careful a study of the Ηebrew tongue that he read with understanding the original Ηebrew Scriptures.
 Αnd he was by nο means unacquainted with the most liberal studies and Greek primary education;
 but withal he was by baturea eunuch, having been so frοm his very birth, so that even the emperοr, accounting this asa sort miracle, tοok him into his friendship and honoured him with the charge of the purple dye- wοrks at Tyre.
 we heard him givinga measured exposition of the Scriptures in the church.
 After Cyril, Tyrannus succeeded to the episcopatethe community ofthe Antiochenes,in whose day the attack upon the churches was at its height.
 Αfter socrates as head of the cοmmumunity atLaodicea came Εusebius, being a native of the cityοf Alexandria.
 The reason of his migration was the air of Ρaul.
 For when he had cοme to Syria οn busniessconnectedwith Ρaul, he was prevented frοm returning home by those whο had divine things at heart.
 Ηe wasagoοdly example of piety amοngour cοntemporaries, as it will be easy to discover from the expressions of Dionysius quoted above.
 1 Αnatolius was appointed his successor, one good man, as they say, folloning another.
 Ηe alsο was by race an μὲν καὶ αὐτὸς Ἀλεξανδρεύς, λόγωνδ’ ἕνεκα καὶ παιδείας τῆς Ἑλλήνων φιλοσοφίας τε τὰ πρῶτα τῶν μάλιστα καθ’ ἡμᾶς δοκιμωτάτων ἀπενηνεγμένος, ἅτε ἀριθμητικῆς καὶ γεωμετρίας ἀστρονομίας τε καὶ τῆς ἄλλης, διαλεκτικῆς εἴτε φυσικῆς, θεωρίας ῥητορικῶν τε αὖ μαθημάτων ἐληλακὼς εἰς ἄκρον·
 ὧν ἕνεκα καὶ τῆς ἐπ’ Ἀλεξανδρείας Αριατοτέλους διαδοχῆς τὴν διατριβὴν λόγος ἔχει πρὸς τῶν τῇδε πολιτῶν συστήσασθαι ἀξιωθῆναι.
 μυρίας μὲν οὖν τοῦδε καὶ ὤας ἀριστείας ἐν τῆ κατ’ Ἀλεξάνδρειαν τοῦ Πιρουχίου πολιορκίᾳ μνημονεύουσιν, ἅτε τῶν ἐν τέλει προνομίας ἐξαιρέτου πρὸς ἁπάντων ἠξιωμένου, δείγματοςδ’ ἕνεκα μόνου τοῦδε ἐπιμνησθήσομαι.
 τοῦ πυροῦ, φααίν, τοῖς πολιορκουμένοις.
 ἐπιλελοιπότος, ὡς ἤδη τῶν ἔξωθεν πολεμίων μᾶλλον αὐτοῖς τὸν λιμὸν ἀφόρητον καθεστάναι, παρὼν ὁ δηλούμενος οἰκονομεῖταί τι τοιοῦτον.
 θατέρου μέρους τῆς πόλεως τῷ Ῥωμαϊκῷ συμμαχοῦντος ατρατῷ ταύτῃ τε τυγχάνοντος ἀπολιορκήτου, τὸν Εὐαέβιον ἔτι γὰρ εἶναι τότε αὐτόθι πρὸ τῆς ἐπὶ Συρίαν μεταναστάσεως) ἐν ἐν τοῖς ἀπολιορκήτοις ὄντα μέγα τε κλέος καὶ διαβόητον ὄνομα μέχρι καὶ τοῦ Ῥωμαίων ατρατηλάτου κεκτημένον, περὶ τῶν λιμῷ διαφθειρομένων κατὰ τὴν πολιορκίαν πέμψας ὁ Ἀνατόλιος ἐκδιδάσκει·
 ὃ δὲ μαθών, σωτηρίαν τοῖς ἀπὸ τῶν πολεμίων αὐτομόλοις παρασχεῖν ὡς ἐν μεγίστῃ χάριτι δωρεᾶς τὸν Ῥωμαίων στρατηγὸν αἰτεῖται, καὶ τῆς ἀξιώσεώς γε τυχὼν ἐμφανὲς τῷ Ἀνατολίῳ καθίστησιν.
 ὃ δὲ αὐτίκα τὴν ἐπαγγελίαν Alexandrian, who for his learning, secular educationd philosophy had attainedthe first place among our οst illustrious contemporaries;
 inasmuch as in ithmetic and geometry, in astronomy and other iences, whether οf logic οrof physics,and in thes of rhetoricas well, he had reached the pinnacle.
t is recorded that becauseofthese attainments the citizens there deemed him worthy to establish the school of the Aristotelian tradition1 at Now countless other οf his deeds of prowess are reted during the siege of the Pirucheum2 at seeing that he was deemed worthy by all of extraordinary privilege omong the officials;
 but as an exampleI shall make mentionof the following one only.
 It is said that When the wheat failed the besieged, so that hunger was nowa more intolerable thing than their enemies without, the person of whomwe are speaking, being present, adopted the following device.
 The other part of the city was fighting in alliance withthe Roman army, and thus was not besieged.
 Αmοng these latter was Eusebius( for it said that he was still there at that time before his igration to Syria), who had won so great fame and widespread a reputation that it reached the ears en οf the Roman general.
 To him Anatolius sent,d informed him as to those that were perishingof nger inthe siege.
 When he learnt it, he asked the man commander as a very great favour to grantetyto deserters from the enemy;
 and having obtained his requert acquainted Anatolius of the fact.
 The moment Anatolius received the promise, he δεξάμενος, βουλὴν τῶν Ἀλεξανδρέων συναγαγών τὰ μὲν πρῶτα πάντας ἠξίου φιλικὴν δοῦναι Ῥωμαίοις δεξιάν, ὡς δ’ ἀγριαίνοντας ἐπὶ τῷ λόγῳ συνεῖδεν,“ ἀλλ’ οὐ τούτῳ γε,’’ φησίν,“ ἀντιλέξειν ποθ’ ὑμᾶς οἴομαι, εἰ τοὺς περιττοὺς καὶ ἡμῖν αὐτοῖς οὐδαμῆ χρησίμους, γραΐδας καὶ νήπια καὶ πρεσβύτας, ἐκδοῦναι πυλῶν ἔξω βαδίζειν ὅποι καὶ βούλοιντο, συμβουλεύσαιμι.
 τί γὰρ δὴ τούτους εἰς μάτην, ὅσον οὔπω τεθνηξομένους, παρ’ ἑαυτοῖς ἔχομεν;
 τί δὲ τοὺς ἀναπήρους καὶ τὰ σώματα λελωβημένους τῷ λιμῷ κατατρύχομεν, τρέφειν δέον μόνους ἄνδρας καὶ νεανίας καὶ τὸν ἀναγκαῖον πυρὸν τοῖς ἐπὶ φυλακῆ τῆς πόλεως ἐπιτηδείοις ταμιεύεσθαι;’
 ’ τοιούτοις τισὶν λογισμοῖς πείσας τὸ συνέδριον, ψῆφον πρῶτος ἀναστὰς ἐκφέρει πᾶν τὸ τῆ στρατείᾳ μὴ ἐπιτήδειον εἴτε ἀνδρῶν εἴτε γυναικῶν γένος ἀπολύειν τῆς πόλεως, ὅτι μηδὲ καταμένουσιν αὐτοῖς καὶ εἰς ἄχρηστον ἐν τῆ πόλει διατρίβουσιν ἐλπὶς ἂν γένοιτο σωτηρίας, πρὸς τοῦ λιμοῦ διαφθαρησομένοις.
 ταύτῃ δὲ τῶν λοιπῶν ἁπάντων τῶν ἐν τῆ βουλῆ συγκαταθεμένων μικροῦ δεῖν τοὺς πάντας τῶν πολιορκουμένων μένων διεσώσατο, ἐν πρώτοις μὲν τῶν ἀπὸ τῆς ἐκκλησίας, ἔπειτα δὲ καὶ τῶν ἄλλων τῶν κατὰ τὴν πόλιν πᾶσαν ἡλικίαν διαδιδράσκειν προμηθούμενος, οὐ μόνον τῶν κατὰ τὴν ψῆφον δεδογμένων, τῇ δὲ τούτων προφάσει καὶ μυρίους ἄλλους, λεληθότως γυναικείαν στολὴν ἀμπισχομένους νύκτωρ τε τῆ ἐκείνου φροντίδι τῶν πυλῶν ἐξιόντας καὶ ἐπὶ τὴν Ῥωμαίων στρατιὰν ὁρμῶντας.
 ἔνθα τοὺς πάντας ὑποδεχόμενος ὁ ὁ Εὐσέβιος πατρὸς καὶ ἰατροῦ δίκην κεκακωμένους ἐκ τῆς μακρᾶς πολιορκίας διὰ πάσης προνοίας καὶ assembleda council οfthe Alexandrians,and at first equested all to extendthe right hand οf fellowship to the Romans.
 But when he pereeived that they were getting angry at the proposal, “At any rate,” said he,“I do not thinkyou would contradict me ifI were to counsel that those who were superfluousand in no wise useful to us ourselves, old women and young children and old men, should be permitted too outside the gates whithersoever they wish.
 Why keep we these persons with us to no purpose, seeing ey are all but on the point of death?why destroy we with hunger the mained and crippledin body, when we should support οnlymenand youths, and husband the necessary wheat for such as are required to guard the city?” With some such arguments he persuadedthe assembly,and was the first to rise and give his vote that the whole body of those who were not required for the army, whether men οr women, should depart from the city, because were they to remain and uselessly stay therein, there wouldbe no hope οf safetyfor them, since they would perish with unger.
 Αnd when all the rest of those in the embly assented to this proposal, he went withina le of saving the whole of them that were besieged;
 took care that first of all those belonging to the urch, and then the rest remainingin the city,of ages, should escape, not only those who came der the terms οf the vote, but also great numbers of others, passing themselves off off as such, who secretly donned women's attire,and by his management lefte gates by night and hastened to the Roman army.
 ebius was there to receive them all, and, like a ther and physician, restore them, in evil plight aftereir long siege, with every kind of forethought and θεραπείας ἀνεκτᾶτο.
 τοιούτων ἢ κατὰ Λαοδίκειαν ἐκκλησία δύο ἐφεξῆς κατὰ διαδοχὴν ἠξιώθη ποιμένων, σὺν θείᾳ προμηθείᾳ μετὰ τὸν δηλωθέντα πόλεμον ἐκ τῆς Ἀλεξανδρέων πόλεως ἐπὶ τὰ τῇδε μετεληλυθότων.
 οὐ μενοῦν ἐσπουδάσθη πλεῖστα τῷ Ἀνατολίῳ συγγράμματα, τοσαῦταδ’ εἰς ἡμᾶς ἐλήλυθεν, δι’ ὧν αὐτοῦ καταμαθεῖν δυνατὸν ὁμοῦ τό τε λόγιον καὶ πολυμαθές·
 ἐν οἷς μάλιατα τὰ περὶ τοῦ πάσχα δόξαντα παρίστησιν, ἀφ’ ὧν ἀναγκαῖον ἄν εἴη τούτων ἐπὶ τοῦ παρόντος μνημονεῦσαι.
 ΕK ΤΩΝ ΠΕΡΙ ΤΟΥ ΠΑΣΧΑ ΑΝΑΤΟΛΙΟΥ ΚΑΝΟΝΩΝ“ Ἔχει τοίνυν ἐν τῷ πρώτῳ ἔτει τὴν νουμηνίαν τοῦ πρώτου μηνός, ἥτις ἁπάσης ἐστιν ἀρχὴ τῆς ἐννεακαιδεκαετηρίδος, τὴν κατ’ Αἰγυπτίους μὲν Φαμενὼθ κݲςݲ, ABBREV κατὰ δὲ τοὺς Μακεδόνων Δύστρου κβ, ὡς δ’ ἂν εἴποιεν Ῥωμαῖοι, πρὸ ιݲαݲ Καλανδῶν’ Απριλίων.
 εὑρίσκεται δὲ ὁ ἥλιος ἐν τῆ προκειμένῃ Φαμενὼθ κݲςݲ οὐ μόνον ἐπιβὰς πρώτου τμήματος, ἀλλ’ ἤδη καὶ τετάρτην ἡμέραν ἐν αὐτῷ διαπορευόμενος.
 τοῦτο δὲ τὸ τμῆμα πρῶτον δωδεκατημόριον καὶ ἰσημερινὸν καὶ μηνῶν ἀρχὴν καὶ κεφαλὴν τοῦ κύκλου καὶ ἄφεσιν τοῦ τῶν πλανητῶν δρόμου καλεῖν εἰώθασιν, τὸ δὲ πρὸ τούτου μηνῶν ἔσχατον καὶ τμῆμα δωδέκατον καὶ τελευταῖον δωδεκατημόριον καὶ τέλος τῆς τῶν πλανητῶν περιόδου·
 δι’ ὃ καὶ τοὺς ἐν αὐτῷ τιθεμένους τὸν πρῶτον μῆνα καὶ τὴν τεσσαρεσκαιδεκάτην τοῦ πάσχα κατ’ αὐτὴν λαμβάνοντας οὐ μικρῶς οὐδ’ ὡς ἔτυχεν ἁμαρτάνειν φαμέν.
 ἔστιν δ’ οὐχ attention.
 such were the two pastors that the church of Laodicea was deemed worthy to have successively, who by dinine providence, after the above- mentioned war, had left the city of the Alexandrians to come there.
 Νot a very great many works, indeed, were composed by Anatolius, but enoughhave reached ustoenable us to perceiveboth his eloquenceand his great erudition.
 In these works he especially presents his opinions with reference to the Pascha;
 from which it may be necessary οn the present occasionto give the following passage.
 From the Canons of Anatolius οn the Pascha.
 1 “ It has therefore in the first year the new moon of first the first month, which is the beginning of the nineteen- year cycle, on the 26thof Phamnoth accordingtothe Egyptians, but according to the months of the Macedonians the 22nd of Dystrus, or,as the Romanswould say, the 11th before the Kalends of April.
 The Sun is found on the aforesaid 26th of Phamenoth not only to have arrived at the first sign of the zodiac, but already to be passing through the fourth day within it.
 This sign is commonly called the first of the twelve divisions and the equinoctial signand the beginningof months and headof the cycleandthe starting- point of the planetary course.
 But the preceding sign is the last of the months and the twelfth sign and the last of the twelve divisions and the end of the planetary circuit.
 Therefore we say that they who place the first month in it, and determine the fourteenth day of the Pascha accordingly, 2 are guilty of no small or ordinary mistake.
 ἡμέτερος οὗτος ὁ λόγος, Ἰουδαίοις δὲ ἐγινώσκετο τοῖς πάλαι καὶ πρὸ Χριστοῦ ἐφυλάττετό τε πρὸς αὐτῶν μάλιστα·
 μαθεῖν δ’ ἔστιν ἐκ τῶν ὑπὸ Φίλωνος Ἰωσήπου Μουσαίου λεγομένων, καὶ οὐ μόνων τούτων, ἀλλὰ καὶ τῶν ἔτι παλαιοτέρων ἀμφοτέρων Ἀγαθοβούλων, τῶν ἐπίκλην διδασκάλων Ἀριστοβούλου τοῦ πάνυ, ὃς ἐν τοῖς ο κατειλεγμένος τοῖς τὰς ἱερὰς καὶ θείας Ἑβραίων ἑρμηνεύσασι γραφὰς Πτολεμαίῳ τῷ Φιλαδέλφῳ καὶ τῷ τούτου πατρί, καὶ βίβλους ἐξηγητικὰς τοῦ Μωυσέως νόμου τοῖς αὐτοῖς προσεφώνησεν βασιλεῦσιν.
 οὗτοι τὰ ζητούμενα κατὰ τὴν Ἔξοδον ἐπιλύοντες, φασὶ δεῖν τὰ διαβατήρια θύειν ἐπ’ ἴσης ἅπαντας μετὰ ἰσημερίαν ἐαρινήν, ἐαρινήν, τοῦ πρώτου μηνός·
 τοῦτο δὲ εὑρίσκεσθαι, τὸ πρῶτον τμῆμα τοῦ ἡλιακοῦ, ἢ ὥς τινες αὐτῶν ὠνόμασαν, ζῳοφόρου κύκλου διεξιόντος ἡλίου.
 ὁ δὲ Ἀριστόβουλος προστίθησιν ὡς εἴη ἐξ ἀνάγκης τῇ τῶν διαβατηρίων ἑορτῇ μὴ μόνον τὸν ἥλιον ἰσημερινὸν διαπορεύεσθαι τμῆμα, καὶ τὴν σελήνην δέ.
 τῶν γὰρ ἰσημερινῶν τμημάτων ὄντων δύο, τοῦ μὲν ἐαρινοῦ, τοῦ’ δε μετοπωρινοῦ, καὶ διαμετρούντων ἄλληλα δοθείσης τε τῆς τῶν διαβατηρίων ἡμέρας τῇ τεσσαρεσκαιδεκάτῃ τοῦ μηνὸς μεθ’ ἑσπέραν, ἐνστήξεται μὲν ἡ σελήνη τὴν ἐναντίαν καὶ διάμετρον τῷ ἡλίῳ στάσιν, ὥσπερ οὖν ἔξεστιν ἐν ταῖς πανσελήνοις ὁρᾶν, ἔσονται δὲ μὲν κατὰ τὸ ἐαρινὸν ἰσημερινόν, ὁ ἥλιος, τμῆμα, ἢ δὲ ἐξ ἀνάγκης κατὰ τὸ φθινοπωρινὸν ἰσημερινόν ἡ σελήνη.
 οἶδα πλεῖστα καὶ ἄλλα πρὸς αὐτῶν λεγόμενα, τοῦτο μὲν πιθανά, τοῦτο δὲ κατὰ τὰς κυριακὰς ἀποδείξεις προιόντα, δι’ ὧν παριστάνεινΑnd this is not our οwn statement, but the fact was knownto the Jews, those of οld time even before Christ, and it was carefully observed by them.
 One may learn it from what is said by Philo, Josephus and Musaeus, and not only by them but also by those of still more ancient date,the two Agathobuli, surnamed the Masters οf Aristobulus the Great.
 Ηe was reckoned among the Seventy who translated sacred and divine Hebrew Scriptures for Philadelphus and his father;
 and he dedicated books exegetical of the Law of Moses to the same kings.
 These writers, when they resolve the questions relativetothe Exodus,say that all equallyoughtto sacrifice the passover after the vernal equinox, at the middleofthe first month;
 and that this is found to occur when the sun is passing through the first sign of the solar, or, as some have named it, the zodiacal cycle.
 Αnd Aristobulus adds that at the feastofthe passover it is necessary that not onlythesun should be passing throughan equinoctial sign, but the moon also For as theequinoctialsigns are two,the οne vernal,the other autumnal, diametrically oppositeeachto other, and as the fourteenth of the month, at evening, is assignedas the day οfthe passover,the moon will have its place in the station that is diametrically opposedto the sun, as maybe seen in full moon;
 and the one, the sun, will be in the sign οf the vernal equinox, while the other, the moon, will οf necessity be in thatofthe autumnal.
I know many other statements of theirs, some of them probable, others advancedas absolute proofs, 1 by which they attempt to establish that the Feast of πειρῶνται τὴν τοῦ πάσχα καὶ τῶν ἀζύμων ἑορτὴν δεῖν πάντως μετ’ ἰσημερίαν ἄγεσθαι·
 παρίημι δὲ τὰς τοιαύτας τῶν ἀποδείξεων ὕλας ἀπαιτῶν ὧν περιῄρηται μὲν τὸ ἐπὶ τῷ Μωυσέως νόμῳ κάλυμμα, ἀνακεκαλυμμένῳ δὲ τῳ προσώπῳ λοιπὸν ἤδη Χριστὸν καὶ τὰ Χριστοῦ ἀεὶ κατοπτρίζεσθαι μαθήματά τε καὶ παθήματα.
 τοῦ δὲ τὸν πρῶτον παρ’ Ἑβραίοις μῆνα περὶ ἰσημερίαν εἶναι παραστατικὰ καὶ τὰ ἐν τῷ Ἑνὼχ μαθήματα. ’
’ καὶ ἀριθμητικὰς δὲ καταλέλοιπεν ὁ αὐτὸς ἐν ὅλοις δέκα αυγγράμμασιν εἰσαγωγὰς καὶ ἄλλα δείγματα τῆς περὶ τὰ θεῖα σχολῆς τε αὐτοῦ καὶ πολυπειρίας.
 τούτῳ πρῶτος ὁ τῆς Παλαιστίνων Καισαείας ἐπίσκοπος Θεότεκνος χεῖρας εἰς ἐπισκοπὴν ἐπιτέθεικεν, διάδοχον ἑαυτοῦ μετὰ τελυτὴν ποριεῖσθαι τῇ ἰδίᾳ παροικίᾳ προμνώμενος, καὶ δὴ ἐπὶ σμικρόν τινα χρόνον ἄμφω τῆς αὐτῆς προύστησαν ἐκκλησίας·
 ἀλλὰ γὰρ ἐπὶ τὴν Ἀντιόχειαν τῆς κατὰ Παῦλον συνόδου καλούσης, τὴν Λαοδικέων πόλιν παριὼν πρὸς τῶν ἀδελφῶν αὐτόθι κοιμηθέντος Εὐσεβίου κεκράτηται.
 καὶ τοῦ Ἀνατολίου δὲ τὸν βίον μεταλλάξαντος, τῆς ἐκεῖσε παροικίας ὕστατος τῶν πρὸ τοῦ διωγμοῦ καθίσταται Στέφανος, λόγων μὲν φιλοσόφων καὶ τῆς ἄλλης παρ’ Ἕλλησι παιδείας παρὰ τοῖς πολλοῖς θανμασθείς, οὐχ ὁμοίως γε μὴν περὶ τὴν θείαν πίστιν διατεθειμένος, ὡς προιὼν ὁ τοῦ διωγμοῦ καιρὸς ἀπήλεγξεν, εἴρωνα μᾶλλον δειλόν τε καὶ ἄνανδρον ἤπερ ἀληθῆ φιλόσοφον ἀποδείξας τὸν ἄνδρα.
 οὐ μὴν ἐπὶ τούτῳ γε καταστρέφειν ἔμελλε the Passover and of unleavened bread ought without exception to be held after the equinox.
 ButI refrain from demanding proofs thus composed from those for whom the veil upon the law of Moses has been taken away, and for whom it now remains with unveiled face ever to behold as in a mirror Christ and the things of Christ, both what Ηe learned and what Ηe suffered.
 1 But that the hrst month with the Ηebrews lies around the equinox is shown also by the teachings in the Book of Enoch.
 ” 2 And the same person has left behind an Introduction to Arithmetic also in ten complete treatises, and, as well, evidences of his Study and deep knowledge οf divine things.
 Theotecnus, bishop of Caesareain Palestine, first had ordained him to the episcopate, seeking to procure him as his successor in his own community after his death, and indeed for Some Short time both presided over the same church.
 But, the synod with reference to Ρaul summoning him to Antioch, as he was passing by the city οf the Laodiceans he was retained there by the brethren, Eusebius having fallen asleep.
 Αnd when Anatolius also departed this life, Stephen was appointed over the community there, the last bishop before the persecution.
 Ηe won widespread admiration for his knowledge of philosophy and other secular learning, but he was not similarly disposed towards the divine faith, as the progress of thepersecution cleariy proved, demonstrating that the man was moreοfa dissembler, more ofa craven and coward, than a true philosopher.
 But indeed the church and her affairs were not destined to perish τὰ τῆς ἐκκλησίας, ἀνορθοῦται δ’ αὐτὰ πρὸς αὐτοῦ θεοῦ τοῦ πάντων σωτῆρος αὐτίκα τῆς αὐτόθι παροικίας ἐπίσκοπος ἀναδειχθεὶς Θεόδοτος, πράγμασιν αὐτοῖς ἀνὴρ καὶ τὸ κύριον ὄνομα καὶ τὸ ἐπίσκοπον ἐπαληθεύσας.
 ἰατρικῆς μὲν γὰρ σωμάτων ἀπεφέρετο τὰ πρῶτα τῆς ἐπιστήμης, ψυχῶν δὲ θεραπευτικῆς οἷος οὐδὲ ἄλλος ἀνθρώπων ἐτύγχανεν φιλανθρωπίας γνησιότητος συμπαθείας σπουδῆς τῶν τῆς παρ’ αὐτοῦ δεομένων ὠφελείας ἕνεκεν, πολὺ δὲ ἢν αὐτῷ καὶ τὸ περὶ τὰ θεῖα μαθήματα συνησκημένον.
 οὗτος μὲν δὴ τοιοῦτος ἦν.
 Ἐν Καισαρείᾳ δὲ τῆς Παλαιστίνης Θεότεκνον σπουδαιότατα τὴν ἐπισκοπὴν διελθόντα Ἀγάπιος διαδέχεται·
 ὃν καὶ πολλὰ καμεῖν γνησιωτάτην τε πρόνοιαν τῆς τοῦ λαοῦ προστασίας ἴομεν πεποιημένον πλουσίᾳ τε χειρὶ πάντων μάλιστα πενήτων ἐπιμεμελημένον.
 κατὰ τοῦτον ἐλλογιμώτατον αὐτῷ τε βίῳ φιλόσοφον ἀληθῆ πρεσβείου τῆς αὐτόθι παροικίας ἠξιωμένον Πάμφιλον ἔγνωμεν·
 ὃν ὁποῖός τις ἦν καὶ ὅθεν ὁρμώμενος, οὐ σμικρᾶς ἂν γένοιτο δηλοῦν ὑποθέσεως·
 ἕκαστα δὲ τοῦ κατ’ αὐτὸν βίου καὶ ἧς συνεστήσατο διατριβῆς, τούς τε κατὰ τὸν διωγμὸν ἐν διαφόροις ὁμολογίαις ἀγῶνας αὐτοῦ καὶ ὃν ἐπὶ πᾶσιν ἀνεδήσατο τοῦ μαρτυρίου στέφανον, ἐν ἰδίᾳ τῆ περὶ αὐτοῦ διειλήφαμεν ὑποθέσει.
 ἀλλ’ οὗτος μὲν τῶν τῇδε θαυμασιώτατος·
 ἐν δὲ τοῖς μάλιστα καθ’ ἡμᾶς σπανιωτάτους γενομένους ἴσμεν τῶν μὲν ἐπ’ Ἀλεξανδρείας πρεσβυτέρων Πιέριον, Μελέτιον δὲ τῶν κατὰ Πόντον ἐκκλησιῶν ἐπίσκοπον.
 ἀλλ’ δ’ μὲν ἄκρως ἀκτήμονι βίῳ καὶ beeause of him;
 they were set to rights by one who was immediately proclaimed bishop of that communitybyGod Himself,the the Saviour of all, even Theodotus,a man whose deeds themselnes proned true his ritle to his own name and that ofa bishop.
 Ηe had reached, indeed,the first rank in the science of healing bodies, but in thatofcuring souls he was second to none among men, because ofhis benevolence, sincerity, fellow- feeling and zeal towards those that sought his aid;
 and he was also greatly denoted to the study of divinity.
 Such a one was he.
 But at Caesareain Palestine Theotecnus, after exercising his episcopal office in the most zealous fashion, was sueeeededby Agapius, whom also we know to have laboured much, displaying a most genuine regard for the gonernmentof his people, and witha liberal hand caring especially for all the poor.
 In his daywe came to known Pamphilus,a most eloquent man anda true philosopher in his mode of life, who had been deemed worthy of the presbyterate of that community.
 It would be no small undertaking to show the kind of man he was and whence he eame.
 But of each particular of his life and of the schoolthathe established,as wellashis contest in various confessionsduring the persecution, and the crown of martyrdom with which he was wreathed at the endof all,we have treated separately ina special work concerning him.
 Truly he was the most admirable of those of that city;
 but as men possessed of especially rare qualities in our daywe know Pierius, one ofthepresbyters at Alexandria,and Μeletius, bishop of the churches in Pontus.
 The former of these had been noted for his life of extreme μαθήμασιν φιλοσόφοις δεδοκίμαστο, ταῖς περὶ τὰ θεῖα θεωρίαις καὶ ἐξηγήσεσιν καὶ ταῖς ἐπὶ τοῦ κοινοῦ τῆς ἐκκλησίας διαλέξεσιν ὑπερφυῶς ἐξησκημένος·
 ὁ δὲ Μελέτιος τὸ μέλι τῆς Ἀττικῆς ἐκάλουν αὐτὸν οἱ ἀπὸ παιδείας) τοιοῦτος ἢν οἷον ἂν γραφεῖέν τις τὸν κατὰ πάντα λόγων ἕνεκα τελεώτατον.
 ῥητορικῆς μέν γε τὴν ἀρετὴν οὐδ’ οἷόν τε θαυμάζειν ἐπαξίως, ἀλλὰ τοῦτο μὲν εἶναι αὐτῷ φαίη ἄν τις τὸ κατὰ φύσιν·
 τῆς δ’ ἄλλης πολυπειρίας τε καὶ πολυμαθείας τίς ἂν τὴν ἀρετὴν ὑπερβάλοιτο, ὅτι δὴ ἐπὶ πάσαις λογικαῖς ἔπι.
 στήμαις τὸν τεχνικώτατον καὶ λογιώτατον, καὶ μόνον πεῖραν αὐτοῦ λαβών, εἶπες ἄν;
 ἐφάμιλλα δὲ αὐτῷ καὶ τὰ τῆς ἀρετῆς παρῆν τοῦ βίου.
 τοῦτον κατὰ τὸν τοῦ διωγμοῦ καιρὸν τοῖς κατὰ Παλαιςτίνην κλίμασιν διαδιδράσκοντα ἐφ’ ὅλοις ἔτεσιν ἑπτὰ κατενοήσαμεν.
 Τῆς δ’ ἐν Ἱεροσολύμοις ἐκκλησίας μετὰ τὸν μικρῷ πρόσθεν δεδηλωμένον ἐπίσκοπον Ὑμέναιον Ζαβδᾶς τὴν λειτουργίαν παραλαμβάνει·
 μετ’ οὐ πολὺ δὲ τούτου κεκοιμημένου, Ἑρμῶν ὕστατος τῶν μέχρι τοῦ καθ’ ἡμᾶς διωγμοῦ τὸν εἰς ἔτι νῦν ἐκεῖσε πεφυλαγμένον ἀποστολικὸν διαδέχεται θρόνον.
 Καὶ ἐπ’ Ἀλεξανδρείας δὲ Μάξιμον ὀκτωκαίδεκα ἔτεσιν μετὰ τὴν Διονυσίου τελευτὴν ἐπισκοπεύσαντα Θεωνᾶς διαδέχεται·
 καθ’ ὃν ἐπὶ τῆς Ἀλεξανδρείας ἐπὶ ταὐτὸν τῷ Πιερίῳ πρεσβυτερίου ἠξιωμένος Ἀχιλᾶς ἐγνωρίζετο, τῆς ἱερᾶς πίστεως τὸ διδασκαλεῖον ἐγκεχειρισμένος, οὐδενὸς ἦττον σπανιώτατον φιλοσοφίας ἔργον καὶ πολιτείας povertyand for his learningin philosophy.
 Ηe was exceedinglywell practised inthedeeper study of divine things andin expositions thereof, as well in his public discourses in church.
 Meletius1( educated persons usedto call himthehoney of Attica)was such as one would describe asa most accomphished scholar in all respects.
 It is impossible to admire sufficiently hisskill in oratory, yet this might be said to be his byanatural gift.
 But who could surpass the excellence of his great experience and eruditionas well, because you would say, even ona siIgle trial, that hewasthe most skilfuland learned man in all branches literature? Equally, too, was his life distinguished for its virtues.
 We took note οf him during the period of the persecution, as for seven whole years he was fleeing in the regions οf Palestine.
 In the church at Jerusalem, after the bishop Hymnaeus mentioned shortly before, Zabdas received the ministry.
 Αfter no great time he fell asleep, and Hermo, the last of the bishops up to the persecution in our day, succeeded to the apostolic throne thathas still been preserved there to the present day.
 2 Αnd at Alexandria too, Maximus, who had held the episcopate for eighteen years after the deathof Dionysius, was succeeded by Theonas.
 In his day at AlexandraAchillas, deemed worthy of the presbyterate along with Pierius, was well known;
 he had been entrusted with the school ofthe sacred faith, having displayeda wealth of philosophy most rare and inferior to none, and a manner of life that was εὐαγγελικῆς τρόπον γνήσιον ἐπιδεδειγμένος.
 μετὰ δὲ Θεωνᾶν ἐννεακαίδεκα ἔτεσιν ἐξυπηρτησάμενον διαδέχεται τὴν ἐπισκοπὴν τῶν ἐπ’ Ἀλεξανδρείας Πέτρος, ἐν τοῖς μάΛιστα καὶ αὐτὸς διαπρέψας ἐφ’ ὅΛοις δυοκαίδεκα ἐνιαυτοῖς, ὧν πρὸ τοῦ διωγμοῦ τρισὶν οὐδ’ ὅλοις ἔτεσιν ἡγησάμενος τῆς ἐκκλησίας, τὸν λοιπὸν τοῦ βίου χρόνον εὐτονωτέρᾳ τῇ συνασκήσει ἑαυτόν τε ἦγεν καὶ τῆς κοινῆς τῶν ἐκκλησιῶν ὠφελείας οὐκ ἀφανῶς ἐπεμέλετο.
 ταύτῃ δ’ οὗν ἐνάτῳ ἔτει τοῦ διωγμοῦ τὴν κεφαλὴν ἀποτμηθεὶς τῷ τοῦ μαρτυρίου κατεκοσμήθη στεφάνῳ.
 Ἑν τούτοις τὴν τῶν διαδοχῶν περιγράψαντες ὑπόθεσιν, ἀπὸ τῆς τοῦ σωτῆρος ἡμῶν γενέσεως ἐπὶ τὴν τῶν προσευκτηρίων καθαίρεσιν εἰς ἔτη συντείνουσαν πέντε καὶ τριακόσια, φέρε, ἑξῆς καθ’ ἡμᾶς τῶν ὑπὲρ εὐσεβείας ἀνδρισαμένων ἀγῶνας, δάοι τε καὶ ὁπηλίκοι γεγόνασιν, καὶ τοῖς μεθ’ ἡμᾶς εἰδέναι διὰ γραφῆς καταλείψωμεν.
 Note on the Paschal Canons of( ch.
 xxxii.
 14- 19).
 The Ρaschal Table of Anatolius is based on the supposition that after the lapse or every cycle of nineteen years the full moons recur οn the same days οf the month, and at the same hours.
 This method of calculation, although not strictly accurate, was an advance οn the eight- year cycle employed by Hippolytus( vi.
 22) and Dionysius of Alexandria( vii.
 20).
 Anatolius reckons as the first year of his truly in accordance with the Gospel.
 Αfter Theonas had given his utmost service for nineteen years, Ρeter succeededto the episcopate οf the Alexandrians, and he too was especially prominent for twelve entire years;
 he ruled the church for less than three entire years before the persecution, and for the remainder οf his days practised a life of severer discipline, and caredin no hidden manner for the general good of the churches.
 For this reason, therefore,in the ninth year of the persecution hewas beheaded,and so adomed with the crown οf martyrdom.
 In these books having concluded the subjectof he successions, from the birth of οur Saviourtothe destruction of the places of—a subject that extends οver three hundred and five— come, let us next leave in writing, for the information of those also thatcome after us, what the extentand nature have beenofthe conflicts in our ownday οf thosewho manfully contended for piety.
 cycle that upon which“ the new moon οfthe first month”(i.
 e.
 the Jewish Νisan οr Αbib, to our March- April) falls upon March 22:
 he is, however,in error about the vernal equinox, which he places on Μarch 19(§ 15,where Μarch 22 is fourthday”) insteadof March 21.
 Ηe insists( as did alsoDionysius) that the paschal full moon must fall after the equinox, as opposedto those, whom he mentions at the close οf§ 15,who regarded the full moon(“ the fourteenthday”) if it felltheday before the equinox, as the paschal moon.
 Hݲ τάδε καὶ ἡ ὀγδόη περιέχει βίβλος τῆς Εκκλησιαστικῆς ἱστορίας Aݲ Περὶ τῶν πρὸ τοῦ καθ’ ἡμᾶς Bݲ Περὶ τῆς τῶν ἐκκλησιῶν Γݲ Περὶ τοῦ τρόπου τῶν κατὰ τὸν ηγωνισμενων.
 Δݲ Περὶ τῶν ἀοιδίμων τοῦ θεοῦ μαρτύρων, πάντα τόπον ἔπλησαν τῆς ἑαυτῶν μνήμης, ποικίλους τοὺς ὑπὲρ εὐσεβείας ἀναδησάμενοι στεφάνους.
 Εݲ Περὶ τῶν κατὰ ςݲ Περὶ τῶν κατὰ τοὺς βασιλικοὺς Ζݲ Περὶ τῶν κατὰ Φοινίκην Ηݲ Περὶ τῶν κατὰ τὴν Θݲ Περὶ τῶν κατὰ Ιݲ Φιλέου μάρτυρος περὶ τῶν κατ’ πεπραγμένων ἔγγραφοι διδασκαλίαι.
 ΙΑݲ Περὶ τῶν κατὰ ΙΒݲ Περὶ πλείστων ἑτέρων ἀνδρῶν τε καὶ διαφόρως ἠγωνισμένων.
 COΝTEΝTS OF BOOK VIII The Eighth Book of the Ecclesiastical History contains the following :
 I.
 on the events before the persecution in our day.
 II.
 On the destruetionof the churches.
 III.
 On the nature of the conflicts endured in the persecution.
 Iv.
 On the famed martyrs of God, how they filled every place with their memory, being wreathed with varied crowns for piety.
 v.
 On those in Nicomedia.
 VI.
 On those in the imperial palaces.
 VII.
 On the Egyptiansin Phoenicia.
 VIII.
 On those in Εgypt.
 IX.
 Οn those inthe Thebais.
 X.
 Accounts in writing of Ρhileas the martyr concerning what had taken place at Alexandria.
 XI.
 On the martyrs in Ρhrygia.
 XII.
 Οn very many others, both men and women, who endured various conflicts.
 ΙݲΓݲ Περὶ τῶν τῆς ἐκκλησίας προέδρων τῶν τὸ γνήσιον ἦς ἐπρέσβευον εὐσεβείας διὰ τοῦ ἁφῶν αἵματος ἐπιδεδειγμένων.
 ΙݲΔݲ Περὶ τοῦ τρόπου τῶν τῆς εὐσεβείας ἐχθρῶν.
 ΙݲEݲ Περὶ τῶν τοῖς ἐκτὸς συμβεβηκότων.
 Ιݲςݲ Περὶ τῆς ἐπὶ τὸ κρεῖττον τῶν πραγμάτων μεταβολῆς.
 ΙݲΖݲ Περὶ τῆς τῶν κρατούντων παλινῳδίας.
 XIII.
 On the presedents of the Church who displaye in their own blood the genuineness of the piety of which they were ambassadors.
 XIV.
 On the character of the enemiesof piety.
 On the events which happened to those without the Church.
 VI.
 On the change of affairs for the better.
 II.
 On the recantationof the rulers.
Η Τὴν τῶν ἀποστόλων διαδοχὴν ἐν ὅλοις ἑπτὰ περιγράψαντες βιβλίοις, ἐν ὀγδόῳ τούτῳ συγγράμματι τὰ καθ’ ἡμᾶς αὐτούς, οὐ τῆς τυχούσης ἄξια ὄντα γραφῆς, ἕν τι τῶν ἀναγκαιοτάτων ἡγούμεθα δεῖν εἰς γνῶσιν καὶ τῶν μεθ’ ἡμᾶς παραδοῦναι, καὶ ἄρξεταί γε ὁ λόγος ἡμῖν ἐντεῦθεν.
 Ι.
 Ὅσης μὲν καὶ ὁποίας πρὸ τοῦ καθ’ ἡμᾶς διωγμοῦ δόξης ὁμοῦ καὶ παρρησίας ὁ διὰ Χριστοῦ τῷ βίῳ κατηγγελμένος τῆς εἰς τὸν τῶν ὅλων θεὸν εὐσεβείας λόγος παρὰ πᾶσιν ἀνθρώποις, τε καὶ βαρβάροις, ἠξίωτο, μεῖξον ἢ καθ’ ἡμᾶς ἐπαξίως διηγήσασθαι·
 τεκμήρια δ’ ἂν γένοιτο τῶν κρατούντων αἱ περὶ τοὺς ἡμετέρους δεξιώσεις, οἷς καὶ τὰς τῶν ἐθνῶν ἐνεχείριζον ἡγεμονίας, τῆς περὶ τὸ θύειν ἀγωνίας κατὰ πολλὴν ἢν ἀπέσῳζον περὶ τὸ δόγμα φιλίαν αὐτοὺς ἀπαλλάττοντες.
 τί δεῖ περὶ τῶν κατὰ τοὺς βασιλικοὺς λέγειν οἴκους καὶ τῶν ἐπὶ πᾶσιν ἀρχόντων;
 οἳ τοῖς οἰκείοις εἰς πρόσωπον ἐπὶ τῷ θείῳ παρρησιαζομένοις λόγῳ τε καὶ βίῳ συνεχώρουν, γαμεταῖς καὶ παισὶ καὶ οἰκέταις, μόνον οὐχὶ καὶ ἐγκαυχᾶσθαι ἐπὶ τῇ παρρησίᾳ τῆς πίστεως ἐπιτρέποντες·
 οὓς ἐξόχως καὶ μᾶλλον τῶν συνθεραπόντων ἀποδεκτοὺς ἡγοῦντο BOOK VIII Having concluded the succession from the apostles in seven entire books, in this eighth treatise we regard it as one of our most urgent duties to hand down, for the knowledge of those that come after us, the events of our own day, which are worthy of no casual record;
 and from this point our account will take its beginning.
 I.
 It is beyond our powers to describe ina worthy manner the measure and nature of that honour as well as freedom which was accorded by all men, both Greeksand barbarians, before the persecution in our day, to that word of piety toward the God of the universe which had been proclaimed through Christ to the world.
 Yet proofs might be forthcoming in the favours granted by the rulers to our people:
 to whom they would even entrust the governmentof the provinces, freeing them from agony of mindas regards sacrificing, because οf the great friendliness that they used to entertain for their doctrine.
 Why need one speak of those in the imperial palaces and of the supreme rulers, who allowed the members of theirhouseholds— wives, children and servants— to practise openly to their face the divine word and conduct, and— one might say— permitted them even to of the freedom accorded to the faith? Αnd these they used to regard with especial esteem and more οἷος ἐκεῖνος ἢν Δωρόθεος, πάντων αὐτοῖς εὐνούστατός τε καὶ πιστότατος καὶ τούτων ἕνεκα διαφερόντως παρὰ τοὺς ἐν ἀρχαῖς καὶ ἡγεμονίαις ἐντιμότατος, ὅ τε σὺν αὐτῷ περιβόητος Γοργόνιος καὶ ὅσοι τῆς αὐτῆς ὁμοίως τούτοις ἠξίωντο διὰ τὸν τοῦ θεοῦ λόγον τιμῆς·
 οἵας τε καὶ τοὺς καθ’ ἑκάστην ἐκκλησίαν ἄρχοντας παρὰ πᾶσιν ἐπιτρόποις καὶ ἡγεμόσιν ἀποδοχῆς ἦν ὁρᾶν ἐξιουμένους.
 πῶς δ’ ἂν τις διαγράψειεν τὰς μυριάνδρους ἐκείνας ἐπισυναγωγὰς καὶ τὰ πλήθη τῶν κατὰ πᾶσαν πόλιν ἀθροισμάτων τάς τε ἐπισήμους ἐν τοῖς προσευκτηρίοις συνδρομάς;
 ὧν δὴ ἕνεκα μηδαμῶς ἔτι τοῖς πάλαι οἰκοδομήμασιν ἀρκούμενοι, εὐρείας εἰς πλάτος ἀνὰ πάσας τὰς πόλεις ἐκ θεμελίων ἀνίστων ἐκκλησίας.
 ταῦτα δὲ τοῖς χρόνοις προιόντα ὁσημέραι τε εἰς αὔξην καὶ μέγεθος ἐπιδιδόντα οὐδεὶς ἀνεῖργεν φθόνος οὐδέ τις δαίμων πονηρὸς οἷός τε ἢν βασκαίνειν οὐδ’ ἀνθρώπων ἐπιβουλαῖς κωλύειν, ἐς δάον ἢ θεία καὶ οὐράνιος χεὶρ ἔσκεπέν τε καὶ ἐφρούρει, οἷα δὴ ἄξιον ὄντα, τὸν ἑαυτῆς λαόν.
 Ὡς δ’ ἐκ τῆς ἐπὶ πλέον ἐλευθερίας ἐπὶ χαυνότητα καὶ νωθρίαν τὰ καθ’ ἡμᾶς μετηλλάττετο, ἄλλων ἄλλοις διαφθονουμένων καὶ διαλοιδορουμένων καὶ μόνον οὐχὶ ἡμῶν αὐτῶν ἑαυτοῖς προσπολεμούντων ὅπλοις, εἰ οὕτω τύχοι, καὶ δόρασιν τοῖς διὰ λόγων ἀρχόντων τε ἄρχουσι προσρηγνύντων καὶ λαῶν ἐπὶ λαοὺς καταστασιαζόντων τῆς τε ὑποκρίσεως ἀφάτου καὶ τῆς εἰρωνείας ἐπὶ πλεῖστον ὅσον κακίας προιούσης, ἡ μὲν δὴ θεία κρίσις, οἷα φίλον αὐτῇ, πεφεισμένως, τῶν ἀθροισμάτων ἔτι συγκροτουμένων, favourably than their fellow- servants.
 such a one was the famous Dorotheus, who surpassed all in his devotionandfaithfulness to them, and for this reason was more highly honoured than men who held positions as rulers or governors.
 With him was the celebrated Gorgonius andall those who, like them, had been deemed worthy of the same honour because of the word of God.
 With what favour one might note that the rulers in every church were honoured by all procuratorsand governors!Αnd how could οne fully describe those assemblies thronged with countless men, and the multitudes that gathered together in every city, and the famed concourses in the places of prayer;
 by reason οf which they were no longer satisfied with the buildingsof οlden time, and would erect from the foundations churches of spacious dimensions throughout all the cities? Αnd as these things went forward with the times, and day by day increasingly grew mightier, no envy could stop them, nor was any evil spirit able to cast its spell or hinder them by human devices, so long as the divine and heavenly hand was sheltering and guarding, asaworthy object,its own people.
 But when, as the resultof greater freedom,a change to prideand sloth cameοverour affairs, we fell to envy and fierce railing against one another, warring upon ourselves, so to speak, as occasion offered, with weapons and spears formed of words;
 and rulers attacked rulers and laity formed factions against laity, while unspeakable hypoerisy and pretence pursued their evil course to the furthest end:
 until the divine judgement witha sparing hand, as is its wont( for the asseblieswerestill crowded), μένων, ἠρέμα καὶ μετρίως τὴν αὐτῆς ἐπισκοπὴν ἀνεκίνει, ἐκ τῶν ἐν στρατείαις ἀδελφῶν καταρχομένου τοῦ διωγμοῦ·
 ὡς δ᾿ ἀνεπαισθήτως ἔχοντες οὐχ ὅπως εὐμενὲς καὶ ἵλεω καταστήσεσθαι τὸ θεῖον προυθυμούμεθα, οἷα δέ τινες ἄθεοι ἀφρόντιστα τιστα καὶ ἀνεπίσκοπα τὰ καθ’ ἡμᾶς ἡγούμενοι ἄλλας ἐπ’ ἄλλαις προσετίθεμεν κακίας οἵ τε δοκουντες ἡμῶν ποιμένες τὸν τῆς θεοσεβείας θεσμὸν παρωσάμενοι ταῖς πρὸς ἀλλήλους ἀνεφλέγοντο φιλονεικίαις, αὐτὰ δὴ ταῦτα μόνα, τὰς ἔριδας καὶ τὰς ἀπειλὰς τόν τε ζῆλον καὶ τὸ πρὸς ἀλλήλους ἔχθος τε καὶ μῖσος ἐπαύξοντες οἷά τε τυραννίδας τὰς φιλαρχίας ἐκθύμως διεκδικοῦντες, τότε δή, τότε κατὰ τὴν φάσκουσαν τοῦ Ἱερεμίου φωνὴν ἐγνόφωσεν ἐν ὀργῇ αὐτοῦ κύριος τὴν θυγατέρα Σιὼν καὶ κατέρριψεν ἐξ οὐράνου δόξασμα Ἰσραὴλ οὐκ ἐμνήσθη τε ὑποποδίου ποδῶν αὐτοῦ ἐν ἡμέρᾳ ὀργῆς αὐτοῦ·
 ἀλλὰ καὶ κατεπόντισεν κύριος πάντα τὰ ὡραῖα Ἰσραὴλ καὶ καθεῖλεν πάντας τοὺς φραγμοὺς αὐτοῦ, κατά τε τὰ ἐν Ψαλμοῖς προαὐτοῦ θεσπισθέντα κατέστρεφεν τὴν διαθήκην τοῦ δούλου καὶ ἐβεβήλωσεν εἰς γῆν διὰ τῆς τῶν ἐκκλησιῶν τὸ ἁγίασμα αὐτοῦ καὶ καθεῖλεν πάντας τοὺς φραγμοὺς αὐτοῦ, ἔθετο τὰ ὀχυρώματα αὐτοῦ δειλίαν·
 διήρπασάν τε τὰ πλήθη τοῦ λαοῦ πάντες οἱ διοδεύοντες ὁδόν, καὶ δὴ ἐπὶ τούτοις ὄνειδος ἐγενήθη τοῖς γείτοσιν αὐτοῦ.
 ὕψωσεν γὰρ τὴν δεξιὰν τῶν ἐχθρῶν αὐτοῦ καὶ ἀπέστρεφεν τὴν βοήθειαν τῆς ῥομφαίας αὐτοῦ καὶ οὐκ ἀντελάβετο αὐτοῦ ἐν τῷ πολέμῳ·
 ἀλλὰ καὶ κατέλυσεν ἀπὸ καθαρισμοῦ αὐτὸν καὶ τὸν θρόνον αὐτοῦ εἰς τὴν γῆν κατέρραξεν ἐσμίκρυνέν τε τὰς quietly and moderately began to exercise its overingt, the persecution commencing with the brethren the army.
 But when in our blindness we took note least care to secure the goodwill and vourof the Deity, but, like some kind of atheists, agained that our affairs escaped all heed and oversight, we went οn adding one wickedness to another;
 and those accounted our pastors, easting asidethe sanctions ofthe fearof God,were enflamed with mutual contentions, and did nothing else but add to strifes and threats, the jealousy, enmity and tred that they used one to another, claiming with all vehemence the objects of their ambition as if they werea despot's spoils;
 then indeed, then according the word spoken by Jeremiah, the Lord hath kened the daughter of Zionin his anger, and hath cast down from heaven the glory of Israel;
 he hath not remembered his footstool in the dayof his anger;
 but the Lord hath also swallowed up all the beauty οf Israel and hath broken down allhis hedges.
 Αnd according to what has beenforetoldin the Psalms,e hath overtumed the covenant οf his servant and th profanedtothe ground, through the destructionofthe churches,his sanctuary and hath broken downall his hedges, he hath made his strongholds cowardice.
 All that pass bytheway have spoiled the multitudesof the people, yea more, he hath becomea reproach tohis neighbours.
 For he hath exalted the right hand of his adversaries, hath turnedback the help of his sword and hath not taken his part in the battle.
 But he hath also made hispurification to cease, and hath cast his throne down to the ground, and hath ἡμέρας τοῦ χρόνου αὐτοῦ, καὶ ἐπὶ πᾶσιν κατέχεεν αὐτοῦ αἰσχύνην.
 II.
 Συντετέλεσται δῆτα καθ’ ἡμᾶς ἅπαντα, ὁπηνίκα τῶν μὲν προσευκτηρίων τοὺς οἴκους ἐξ ὕφους εἰς ἔδαφος αὐτοῖς θεμελίοις καταρριπτουμένους, τὰς δ’ ἐνθέους καὶ ἱερὰς γραφὰς κατὰ μέσας ἀγορὰς πυρὶ παραδιδομένας αὐτοῖς ἐπείδομεν ὀφθαλμοῖς τούς τε τῶν ἐκκλησιῶν ποιμένας αἰσχρῶς ὧδε κἀκεῖσε κρυπραζομένους, τοὺς δὲ ἀσχημόνως ἁλισκομένους καὶ πρὸς τῶν ἐχθρῶν καταπαιζομένους, ὅτε καὶ κατ’ ἄλλον προφητικὸν λόγον ἐξεχύθη ἐξουδένωσις ἐπ’ ἄρχοντας, καὶ ἐπλάνησεν αὐτοὺς ἐν ἀβάτῳ καὶ οὐχ ὁδῷ.
 ἀλλὰ τούτων μὲν οὐχ ἡμέτερον διαγράφειν τὰς ἐπὶ τέλει σκυθρωπὰς συμφοράς, ἐπεὶ καὶ τὰς πρόσθεν τοῦ διωγμοῦ διαστάσεις τε αὐτῶν εἰς ἀλλήλους καὶ ἀτοπίας οὐχ ἡμῖν οἰκεῖον μνήμη παραδιδόναι·
 δι’ δ’ καὶ πλέον οὐδὲν ἱστορῆσαι περὶ αὐτῶν διέγνωμεν ἢ δι’ ὧν ἂν τὴν θείαν δικαιώσαιμεν κρίσιν.
 οὐκοῦν οὐδὲ τῶν πρὸς τοῦ διωγμοῦ πεπειραμένων ἢ τῶν εἰς ἅπαν τῆς σωτηρίας νεναυαγηκότων αὐτῇ τε γνώμη τοῖς τοῦ κλύδωνος ἐναπορριφέντων βυθοῖ μνήμην ποιήσασθαι προήχθημεν, μόνα δ’ ἐκεῖνα τῆ καθόλου προσθήσομεν ἱστορίᾳ, ἃ πρώτοις μὲν ἡμῖν αὐτοῖς, ἔπειτα δὲ καὶ τοῖς μεθ’ ἡμᾶς γένοιτ’ ἂν πρὸς ὠφελείας.
 ἴωμεν οὗν ἐντεῦθεν ἤδη τοὺς ἱεροὺς ἀγῶνας τῶν τοῦ θείου λόγου μαρτύρων ὲν ἐπιτομῇ διαγράφοντες.
 Ἔρος τοῦτο ἦν ἐννεακαιδέκατον τῆς Διοκλητιανοῦ βασιλείας, Δύστρος μήν, λέγοιτο δ’ ἄη οὗτος Μάρτιος κατὰ Ῥωμαίους, ἐν ᾧ τῆς τοῦ shortened the days of his time and, last of all, he hath covered him with shame.
 II.
 Αll things in truth were fulfilledin our day, when we saw with our very eyes the houses of prayer cast down to their foundations fromtopto bottom,and the inspired and sacred seriptureS committed to the flames in the midst of the market- places,and the pastors οf the churches, some shamefully hiding themselveshereand there, while others were ignominiously captured and made a mockery by their enemies;
 when also, according toanother prophetic word, He pourethcontempt upon princes, and causeth them to wanderinthe waste, where there is no way.
 But as to these, it is not our part to deseribe their melancholy misfortunes in the issue, even as we do not thinkit proper to hand down to memory their dissensions and unnatural conduct to one another before the persecution.
 Thererore we resolved to place on record nothing more about them than what would justify the divine judgement.
 Accordingly, we determinednot even to mention those who have been tried bythe persecution,or have made utter shipwreckof their salvation, and of their own free will were plunged in the depthsof the billows;
 but we shall add to the general history only such things as maybe profitable, first to ourselves, and then to those that com after us.
 Let us proceed, therefore from this point to give a summary deseription of the sacred conflicts of the martyrs orthe divine Word.
 lt was the nineteenth year of the reign of Diocletian, 1 and the month Dystrus,2 or March, as the Romans would call it, in which, as the festival of the σωτηρίου πάθους ἑορτῆς ἐπελαυνούσης πανταχόσε βασιλικὰ γράμματα, τὰς μὲν ἐκκλησία εἰς ἔδαφος φέρειν, τὰς δὲ γραφὰς ἀφανεῖς πυρὶ γενέσθαι προστάττοντα, καὶ τοὺς μὲν ἐπειλημμένους ἀτίμους, τοὺςδ’ ἐν οἰκετίαις, εἰ ἐπιμένοιεν τῆ τοῦ χριστιανισμοῦ προθέσει, ἐλευθερίας προαγορεύοντα.
 καὶ ἡ μὲν πρώτη καθ’ ἡμῶν γραφὴ τοιαύτη τις ἢν·
 με οὐ πολὺ δὲ ἑτέρων ἐπιφοιτησάντων γραμμάτων, προσετάττετο τοὺς τῶν ἐκκλησιῶν προέδρους πάντας τοὺς κατὰ πάντα τόπον πρῶτα μὲν δεσμοῖς παραδίδοσθαι, εἶθ’ ὕστερον πάσῃ μηχανῆ θύειν παραδίδοσθαι, ΙII.
 τότε δὴ οὖν, τότε πλεῖστοι μὲν δάοι τῶν ἐκκλησιῶν ἄρχοντες, δειναῖς αἰκίαις προθύμως ἐναθλήσαντες, μεγάλων ἀγώνων ἱστορίας ἐπεδείξαντο, μυρίοι δ’ ἄλλοι τὴν Ψυχὴν ὑπὸ δειλίας προναρκήσαντες προχείρως οὕτως ἀπὸ πρώτης ἐξησθένησαν προσβολῆς, τῶν δὲ λοιπῶν ἕκαστος εἴδη διάφορα βασάνων ἐνήλλαττεν, ὃ μὲν μάστιξιν αἰκιζόμενος τὸ σῶμα, ὃ δὲ στρεβλώσεσιν καἰ ξεσμοῖς ἀνυπομονήτοις τιμωρούμενος, ἐφ’ οἷς ἤδη τινὲς οὐκ αἴσιον ἀπηνέγκαντο τοῦ βίου τέλος.
 ἄλλοι δ’ αὖ πάλιν ἄλλως τὸν ἀγῶνα διεξῄεσαν·
 ὃ μὲν γάρ τις ἑτέρων βίᾳ συνωθούντων καὶ ταῖς παμμιάροις καὶ ἀνάγνοις προσαγόντων θυσίαις ὡς τεθυκὼς ἀπηλλάττετο, καὶ εἰ μὴ τεθυκὼς ἢν, ὃ δὲ μηδ’ ὅλως προσπελάσας μηδέ τινος ἐναγοῦς ἐφαψάμενος, εἰρηκότων δ’ ἑτέρων ὅτι τεθύκοι, σιωπῇ φέρων τὴν συκοφαντίαν ἀπῄει·
 ἡμιθνὴς αἰρόμενος ὡς ἂν ἤδη νεκρὸς ἐρρίπτετο, καί τις αὖ πάλιν ἐπ’ ἐδάφους κείμενος μακρὰν Saviour's Ρassion 1was coming on,an imperial letteras everywhere promulgated, ordering the razing οfe churches to the groundandthe destruction by οf the Scriptures, and proclaiming that those whold high posiuons would lose all civil rights, while οse in households, if they persisted in their profeson on of Christianity, would be deprived of their liberty.
 uch was the first document against us.
 But not ng afterwards we were further visited with other ers, and in them the order was given thatthe presidents of the churches should all,in every place, first committedto prison,and then afterwards mpelled by every kind of device to sacrifice.
 I.
 Then indeed, then very many rulers of the urches contended with a stout heart under terrible rments, and displayed spectacles of mighty conflicts;
 ile countless others, whose souls cowardice had numbed beforehand, readily proved weak at the first ult;
 while οf the rest, each underwenta serues varried forms of torture:
 one would have his body treated by scourgings;
 another would be punished ith the rack and torn toan unbearable degree, hereat some meta miserable end to their life.
 But ers, again, emerged from the connict otherwise:
e man was broughttothe abominable and unholy ifices by the violence of others who pressed round him, and dismissedas if hehadsacrificed, even thoughe had not;
 another who did not so muchasapproach touchany accursed thing, when others had saidthe had sacrfficed, went away bearing the false accusation in silence.
 Α third was taken up half- ad and cast aside as if he werea corpse already;
 and, again,a certain person lying on the ground was aggeda long distanceby the feet, haring been ἐσύρετο τοῖν ποδοῖν, ἐν τεθυκόσιν αὐτοῖς ὁ δέ τις ἐβόα καὶ μεγάλῃ διεμαρτύρετο φωνῇ τῆς θυσίας τὴν ἄρνησιν, καὶ εἶναι ἐκεκράγει, τῆ τοῦ σωτηρίου ὁμολογίᾳ λαμπρυνόμενος·
 ἕτερος τὸ μὴ τεθυκέναι μηδὲ θύσειν ποτὲ διετείνετο.
 δμὼς δ’ οὗν καὶ οἵδε πολυχειρίᾳ τῆς ἐπὶ τοῦτο τεταγμένης στρατιωτικῆς παρατάξεως κατὰ στόματος παιόμενοι καὶ κατασιγαζόμενοι κατά τε προσώπου καὶ παρειῶν τυπτόμενοι μετὰ βίας ἐξωθοῦντο·
 οὕτως ἐξ ἅπαντος οἱ τῆς θεοσεβείας ἐχθροὶ τὸ δοκεῖν ἠνυκέναι περὶ πολλοῦ ἐτίθεντο.
 Ἀλλ’ οὐ καὶ κατὰ τῶν ἁγίων αὐτοῖς μαρτύρων ταῦτα προυχώρει·
 ὧν εἰς ἀκριβῆ διήγησιν τίς ἄν ἡμῖν ἐξαρκέσειεν λόγος;
 IV.
 μυρίους μὲν γὰρ ἱστορήσαι ἄν τις θαυμαστὴν ὑπὲρ εὐσεβείας τοῦ θεοῦ τῶν ὅλων ἐνδεδειγμένους προθυμίαν, οὐκ ἐξ ὅτουπερ μόνον ὁ κατὰ πάντων ἀνεκινήθη διωγμός, πολὺ πρότερον δὲ καθ’ ὃν ἔτι τὰ τῆς εἰρήνης συνεκροτεῖτο.
 ἄρτι γὰρ ἄρτι πρῶτον ὡσπερ ἄπο κάρου βαθέος ὑποκινουμένου τοῦ τὴν ἐξουσία εἰληφότος κρύβδην τε ἔτι καὶ ἀφανῶς μετὰ τὸν ἀπὸ Δεκίου καὶ Οὐαλεριανοῦ μεταξὺ χρόνον ταῖς ἐκκλησίαις ἐπιχειροῦντος οὐκ ἀθρόως τε τῷ καθ’ ἡμῶν ἐπαποδυομένου πολέμῳ, ἀλλ’ ἔτι τῶν κατὰ τὰ στρατόπεδα μόνων ἀποπειρωμένου( ταύτῃ γὰρ καὶ τοὺς λοιποὺς ἁλῶναι ῥᾳδίως ᾤετο, εἰ πρότερον ἐκείνων καταγωνισάμενος περιγένοιτο), πλείστους παρῆν τῶν ἐν στρατείαις ὁρᾶν ἀσμενέστατα τὸν ἰδιωτικὸν προασπαζομένους βίον, ὡς ἄν μὴ reckoned among those who had voluntarily sacrificed.
e cried out and with a loud voice attested his al to sacrifice, and another shouted aloud thatwasa Christian, glorying inhis confession of the ving Name.
 Another stoutly maintained that he not sacrificed, and never would.
 ese also were struck on the mouth and silenced by large band of soldiers drawn up for that purpose, with blowson their face and cheeks driven ibly away.
 so great storeffidthe enemies of ess set on seemingly by any means to have omplished their purpose.
 But even such methods did not avail them against holy martyrs.
 what word of ours could suffice an accurate description of these? IV.
 For ht tell of countless numbers who displayeda ellous zeal for piety to the God of the universe;
 only from what timethe persecution wasstirred against all,but long before, during the period en peace was still firmly established.
 For when who had receivcd the authority1 was just now akening,as it were, from profound torpor, though was ina secret and hidden manner aheady making pts against the churches during the time thate after Decius and valerian, and didnot get him- in readiness for the war against us all at once, as yet made an artempt οnly upon those in the ps( for in this way he thought that the rest also could easily be taken, if first of all he were to get the r in the conflict with thess):
 then one could seet numbers of those inthearmy most gladlybracingcivil life, so that they might not prove ἔξαρνοι γένοιντο τῆς περὶ τὸν τῶν ὅλων δημιουργὸν εὐσεβείας.
 ὡς γὰρ ὁ στρατοπεδάρχης, ὅστις ποτὲ ἢν ἐκεῖνος, ἄρτι πρῶτον ἐνεχείρει τῷ κατὰ τῶν στρατευμάτων διωγμῷ, φυλοκρινῶν καὶ διακαθαίρων τοὺς ἐν τοῖς στρατοπέδοις ἀναφερομένους αἵρεσίν τε διδοὺς ἢ πειθαρχοῦσιν ἦς μετῆν αὐτοῖς ἀπολαύειν τιμῆς ἢ τοὐναντίον στέρεσθαι ταύτης, εἰ ἀντιτάττοιντο τῷ προστάγματι, πλεῖστοι δάοι τῆς Χριστοῦ βασιλείας στρατιῶται τὴν εἰς αὐτὸν ὁμολογίαν, μὴ μελλήσαντες, τῆς δοκούσης δόξης καὶ εὐπραγίας ἧς εἴχοντο, ἀναμφιλόγως προυτίμησαν.
 ἤδη δὲ σπανίως τούτων εἷς που καὶ δεύτερος οὐ μόνον τῆς ἀξίας τὴν ἀποβολήν, ἀλλὰ καὶ θάνατον τῆς εὐσεβοῦς ἐνστάσεως ἀντικατηλλάττοντο, μετρίως πως ἤδη τότε τοῦ τὴν ἐπι- βουλὴν ἐνεργοῦντος καὶ μέχρις αἵματος ἐπ’ ἐνίων φθάνειν ἐπιτολμῶντος, τοῦ πλήθους, ὡς ἔοικεν, τῶν πιστῶν δεδιττομένου τε αὐτὸν ἔτι καὶ ἀποκναίοντος ἐπὶ τὸν κατὰ πάντων ἀθρόως ἐφορμῆσαι πόλεμον.
 ὡς δὲ καὶ γυμνότερον ἐπαπεδύετο, οὐδ’ ἔστιν λόγῳ δυνατὸν ἀφηγήσασθαι δάους καὶ ὁποίους θεοῦ μάρτυρας ὀφθαλμοῖς παρῆν ὁρᾶν τοῖς ἀνὰ πάσας τάς τε πόλεις καὶ τὰς χώρας οἰκοῦσιν.
 V.
 Αὐτίκα γοῦν τῶν οὐκ ἀσήμων τις, ἀλλὰ καὶ ἄγαν κατὰ τὰς ἐν τῷ βίῳ νενομισμένας ὑπεροχὰς ἐνδοξοτάτων, ἅμα τῷ τὴν κατὰ τῶν ἐκκΛησιῶν ἐν τῇ Νικομηδείᾳ προτεθῆναι γραφήν, ζήλῳ τῷ κατὰ θεὸν ὑποκινηθεὶς διαπύρῳ τε ἐφορμήσας τῇ πίστει, ἐν προφανεῖ καὶ δημοσίῳ κειμένην ὡς ἀνοσίαν καὶ ἀσεβεστάτην ἀνελὼν renegades in their piety toward the creator οf the universe.
 For when the supreme commander, 1 whoever he was, was just making his first attempt at persecuting the soldiers— separating into elasses and thoroughly sifting out those serving in the camps, giving thema choice whether they would οbey and enjoy the rank they held, or else be deprived of it, if they continued to disobey the commandment—a great many soldiersof Christ's kingdom, without hesitation, unquestionably preferredto confess Ηim than retainthe seeming glory and prosperity that they possessed.
 Αnd already in rare cases one οr two of these were receiving not only loss of honour but even death in exchange for their godly stedfastness, for as yet the instigator of the plot was working with a certrisln moderation and daring to proceed unto blood only in some instances;
 fearing, presumably, the multitudeof believers, and hesitating to plunge into the war against us all at οnce.
 But when he prepared himself still further for battle, it is quite impossible to recount the number or the splendour of God's martyrs thatitwas given to the inhabitants throughout all the cities and country parts to see.
 V.
 To begin with, the moment that the decree against the churches was published at Nicomedia,a ertain person2byno means obscure, but most highly onoured as the world counts pre- eminence, movedy zeal toward God and carried away by his burning aith, seized and tore it to pieces, when posted up inn open and public place, as an unholy and profane σπαράττει, δυεῖν ἐπιπαρόντων κατὰ τὴν πόλιν βασιλέων, τοῦ τε πρεσβυτάτου τῶν ἄλλων καὶ τοῦ τὸν τέταρτον ἀπὸ τούτου τῆς ἀρχῆς ἐπικρατοῦντος βαθμόν.
 ἀλλ’ οὗτος μὲν τῶν τηνικάδε πρῶτος τοῦτον διαπρέψας τὸν τρόπον τε τοιαῦτα οἷα καὶ εἰκὸς ἢν ὑπομείνας ὡς ἄν ἐπὶ τοιούτῳ τολμήματι, τὸ ἄλυπον καὶ ἀτάραχον εἰς αὐτὴν τελευταίαν διετήρησεν ἀναπνοήν.
 VI.
 Πάντων δὲ δάοι τῶν πώποτε ἀνυμνοῦνται θαυμάσιοι καὶ ἐπ’ ἀνδρείᾳ βεβοημένοι εἴτε παρ’ Ἕλλησιν εἴτε παρὰ βαρβάροις, θείους ἤνεγκεν ὁ καιρὸς καὶ διαπρεπεῖς μάρτυρας τοὺς ἀμφὶ τὸν Δωρόθεον βασιλικοὺς παῖδας, οἳ καὶ τῆς ἀνωτάτω παρὰ τοῖς δεσπόταις ἠξιωμένοι τιμῆς γνησίων τε αὐτοῖς διαθέσει τέκνων οὐ λειπόμενοι, μείζονα πλοῦτον ὡς ἀληθῶς ἥγηνται τῆς τοῦ βίου καὶ τρυφῆς τοὺς ὑπὲρ εὐσεβείας ὀνειδισμούς τε καὶ πόνους καὶ τοὺς κεκαίνουργημένους ἐπ’ αὐτοῖς πολυτρόπους θανάτους·
 ὧν ἑνός τινος οἴῳ κέχρηται μνησθέντες τῷ τοῦ βίου τέλει, σκοπεῖν ἐξ αὐτοῦ καὶ τὰ τοῖς ἄλλοις συμβεβηκότα τοῖς ἐντυγχάνουσιν καταλείψομεν.
 Ἤγετό τις εἰς μέσον κατὰ τὴν προειρημένην πόλιν ἐφ’ ὧν δεδηλώκαμεν ἀρχόντων.
 θύειν δὴ οὖν προσταχθείς, ὡς ἐνίστατο, γυμνὸς μετάρσιος ἀρθῆναι κελεύεται μάστιξίν τε τὸ πᾶν σῶμα καταξαίνεσθαι, εἰς ὅτε ἡττηθεὶς κάν ἄκων τὸ προσταττόμενον ποιήσειεν.
 ὡς δὲ καὶ ταῦτα πάσχων ἀδιάτρεπτος ἢν, ὄξος λοιπὸν ἤδη τῶν ὀστέων ὑποφαινομένων σὺν καὶ ἅλατι φύραντες κατὰ τῶν διασαπέντων τοῦ σώματος μερῶν ἐνέχεον·
 thing;
 and this hedid while two emperors were present in the same city, the seniorofthem all,1 he who held the fourth place in the government after him.
 2 But this man was the first of those at that time who thus distinguished himself;
 and, at the same time, in his endurance of such resultS as naturally followed a daring act of this kind, he maintainedan untroubled and unffisturbed demeanour to his very last breath.
 VI.
 But among all those whose praises have ever yet been sung as worthy of admiration and famedfor courage,whether by Greeks or barbarians, this occasion produced those divine and outStanffing martyrs Dorotheus and the imperial servants that were with him.
 These persons had been deemed worthy of the highest honour by their masters, who loved them no less than their own children;
 but they accounted the reproaches and sufferings for piety and the many forms of death that were newly devised against them, as truly greater riches than the fair fame and luxury of this life.
 We shall mentionthe kind of death that οne of them met, and leave our readers to gather from that instance what happened to the οthers.
 Α certain man was publicly brought forward in the city of which we have spoken above, under the rulers we have mentioned.
 Ηe was ordered to sacrifice;
 and, as he refused, the command was given that he should be raised on high naked, and have his whole body torn with scourges, until he should give in, and even against his will do what was bidden him.
 But when he remained unmoved even under these sufferings, they proceeded to mix vinegar and salt together and pour them into the mangled partsofhis body, where the bones were already showing.
 Αnd as he ὡς δὲ καὶ ταύτας ἐπάτει τὰς ἀλγηδόνας, ἐσχάρα τοὐντεῦθεν καὶ πῦρ εἰς μέσον εἵλκετο, καὶ κρεῶν ἐδωδίμων δίκην τὰ λείψανα αὐτῷ τοῦ σώματος ὑπὸ τοῦ πυρὸς οὐκ εἰς ἄθρουν, ὡς ἂν μὴ συντόμως ἀπαλλαγείη, κατὰ βραχὺ δὲ ἀνηλίσκετο, οὐ πρότερον ἀνεῖναι τῶν ἐπιτιθέντων αὐτὸν τῆ πυρᾷ συγχωρουμένων, πρὶν ἂν καὶ μετὰ τοσαῦτα τοῖς προσταττομένοις ἐπινεύσειεν.
 ὁ δ’ ἀπρὶξ ἐχόμενος τῆς προθέσεως νικηφόρος ἐν αὐταῖς βασάνοις παρέδωκε τὴν Ψυχήν.
 τοιοῦτον τῶν βασιλικῶν ἑνὸς τὸ μαρτύριον παίδων, ἄξιον ὡς ὄντως καὶ τῆς προσηγορίας·
 Πέτρος γὰρ ἐκαλεῖτο.
 Οὐ χείρονα δὲ καὶ τὰ κατὰ τοὺς λοιποὺς ὄντα λόγου φειδόμενοι συμμετρίας παραλείψομεν, τοσοῦτον ἱστορήσαντες ὡς ὅ τε Δωρόθεος καὶ ὁ Γοργόνιος ἑτέροις ἅμα πλείοσιν τῆς βασιλικῆς οἰκετίας τοὺς πολυτρόπους ἀγῶνας βρόχῳ τὴν ζωὴν μεταλλάξαντες, τῆς ἐνθέου νίκης ἀπηνέγκαντο βραβεῖα.
 Ἐν τούτῳ τῆς κατὰ Νικομήδειαν ἐκκλησίας ὁ τηνικαῦτα προεστὼς Ἄνθιμος διὰ τὴν εἰς χριστὸν μαρτυρίαν τὴν κεφαλὴν ἀποτέμνεται·
 τούτῳ δὲ πλῆθος ἄθρουν μαρτύρων προστίθεται, οὐκ οἱδ’ ὅπως ἐν τοῖς κατὰ τὴν Νικομήδειαν Βασιλείοις πυρκαιᾶς ἐν αὐταῖς δὴ ταῖς ἡμέραις ἁφθείσης, ἢν καθ’ ὑπόνοιαν ψευδῆ πρὸς τῶν ἡμετέρων ἐπιχειρηθηναι λόγου διαδοθέντος, παγγενεῖ σωρηδὸν βασιλικῷ νεύματι τῶν τῇδε θεοσεβῶν οἳ μὲν ξίφει κατεσφάττοντο, οἳ δὲ διὰ πυρὸς ἐτελειοῦντο, ὅτε λόγος ἔχει προθυμίᾳ θείᾳ τινὶ καὶ ἀρρήτῳ ἄνδρας ἅμα γυναιξὶν ἐπὶ τὴν πυρὰν καθαλέσθαι·
 δήσαντες δὲ οἱ δήμιοι ἄλλο τι πλῆθος ἐπὶ σκάφαις τοῖς θαλαττίοις ἐναπέρριπτον βυθοῖς.
 τοὺς δέ γε βααλικοὺς despised these pains also,a gridiron andfirewere then produced, and the remnants of his body, just as if it werefleshfor eating, were consumedbythe fire, not all at once, in case he might find immediate release, but tittle by little;
 nor were those who placed him on the pyre allowed to desist, until,after such sufferings, he should signifyhis assent to what was commanded.
 But he clung fixedly to his purpose, and triumphantly gave up the ghost in the midst of his tortures.
 Such was the martyrdom of one of the imperialservants, who truly was worthy of his name.
 For he was called Ρeter.
 But we shall pass by the martyrdoms of the rest, though they were not inferior, having regardto the due proportionsof the book;
 only Ρlacing it on record that Dorotheusand Gorgonius, together with many others of the household, after conflicts οf various kinds, departed this life by strangling, and so carried off the prizes οf the Good- given victory.
 Αt that time Αnthimus, who then prerided over thechurch at Nicomedia, was beheaded for his witness to Christ.
 Αnd with him was associateda large number ofmartyrs all together;
 for,I know nothow, in the Ρalace at Nicomediaa fire broke οut in those very days, and througha false suspicion the rumour went around that it was the work οf our people:
 and by the imperial command the God- fearing persons there, whole familiesand in heaps, were in some cases butchered with the sword;
 while others wereperfacted by fire, when itis recorded thatmenand women leaped upon the pyre witha divine and unspeakable eagerness.
 The executioners bounda multitude ofothers, andplacing themon boats threw them into the depths οf the sea.
 Αs to the imperial λικοὺς μετὰ θάνατον παῖδας, γῇ μετὰ τῆς προσηκούσης κηδείας παραδοθέντας, αὖθις ἐξ ὑπαρχῆς ἀνορύξαντες ἐναπορῖψαι θαλάττῃ καὶ αὐτοὺς ᾤοντο δεῖν οἱ νενομισμένοι δεσπόται, ὡς ἄν μὴ ἐν μνήμασιν ἄπο κειμένους προσκυνοῖέν τινες, θεοὺς δὴ αὐτούς, ὥς γε ᾤοντο, λογιζόμενοι.
 καὶ τὰ μὲν ἐπὶ τῆς Νικομηδείας κατὰ τὴν ἀρχὴν ἀποτελεσθέντα τοῦ διωγμοῦ τοιαῦτα·
 οὐκ εἰς μακρὸν δ’ ἑτέρων κατὰ τὴν Μελιτηνὴν οὕτω καλουμένην χώραν καὶ αὖ πάλιν ἄλλων ἀμφὶ τὴν Συρίαν ἐπιφυῆναι τῇ βασιλείᾳ πεπειραμένων, τοὺς πανταχόσε τῶν ἐκκλησιῶν προεστῶτας εἱρκταῖς καὶ δεσμοῖς ἐνεῖραι πρόσταγμα ἐφοίτα βασιλικόν.
 καὶ ἢν ἢ θέα τῶν ἐπὶ τούτοις γινομένων πᾶσαν διήγησιν ὑπεραίρουσα, μυρίου πλήθους ἐν παντὶ τόπῳ καθεργνυμένου καὶ τὰ πανταχῆ δεσμωτήρια, ἀνδροφόνοις καὶ τυμβωρύχοις πάλαι πότερον ἐπεσκευασμένα, τότε πληρούντων ἐπισκόπων καὶ πρεσβυτέρων καὶ διακόνων ἀναγνωστῶν τε καὶ ἐποκιστῶν, ὡς μηδὲ χώραν ἔτι τοῖς ἐπὶ κάκουργίαις κατακρίτοις αὐτόθι λείπεσθαι.
 Αὖθις δ’ ἑτέρων τὰ πρῶτα γράμματα ἐπικατειληφότων, ἐν οἷς τοὺς κατακλείστους θύσαντας μὲν ἐᾶν βαδίζειν ἐπ’ ἐλευθερίας, ἐνισταμένους δὲ μυρίαις καταξαίνειν προστέτακτο βασάνοις, πῶς ἂν πάλιν ἐνταῦθα τῶν καθ’ ἑκάστην ἐπαρχίαν μαρτύρων ἀριθμήσειέν τις τὸ πλῆθος καὶ μάλιστα τῶν κατὰ τὴν Ἀφικὴν καὶ τὸ Μαύρων ἔθνος Θηβαίδα τε καὶ κατ’ Αἴγυπτον;
 ἐξ ἦς καὶ εἰς servants, whose bodies after death had been committed to the ground with fitting honours,their reputed masters, starting afresh, deemed it necessary to exhume them and cast them also intothe sea, lest any, regarding them as actually gods( so at least they imagined), should worship them as they lay in their tombs.
 such were the things that were done in Νieomedia at the beginning of the persecution.
 But not long afterwards, when somein the districtknownas Melitene, 1 and again οn the other hand when in syria, had attemptedto take possession of the Empire,2 an imperial command Went forth that presidents οf the churches everywhere should be thrown into prison and bonds.
 Αnd the spectacle οf what followed surpasses all description;
 for in every place a countless numberwere shut up, and everywherethe prisons, that long ago had been prepared for murderers and grave- robbers, were then filled with bishops and presbyters and deacons, readers and exorcists, so that therewas no longerany room left therefor those condemnedfor wrongdoing.
 Moreover, the first letter was followedby others, wherein the οrder had been given that thosein prison shouldbe allowed togoin libertyifthey sacrfficed, but if they refused, should be mutilated by countless tortures.
 Αnd then, once more, how could one here number the multitude of the martyrs in each province, and especially of those in Αfriea and³ and in Thebaisand Εgypt? From this last country also some departed into other ἑτέρας ἤδη προελθόντες πόλεις τε καὶ ἐπαρχίας διέπρεψαν τοῖς μαρτυρίοις.
 VII.
 Ἲσμεν γοῦν τοὺς ἐξ αὐτῶν διαλάμψαντας ἐν Παλαιστίνῃ, ἴαμεν δὲ καὶ τοὺς ἐν Τύρῳ τῆς Φοινίκης·
 οὓς τίς ἰδὼν οὐ κατεπλάγη τὰς ἀναρίθμους μάστιγας καὶ τὰς ἐν τούτοις τῶν ὡς ἀληθῶς παραδόξων τῆς Θεοσεβείας ἀθλητῶν ἐνστάσεις τόν τε παραχρῆμα μετὰ τὰς μάστιγας ἐν θηρσὶν ἀνθρωποβόροις ἀγῶνα καὶ τὰς ἐν τούτῳ παρδάλεων καὶ διαφόρων ἄρκτων αὐῶν τε ἀγρίων καὶ πυρὶ καὶ σιθήρῳ κεκαυτηριασμένων βοῶν προσβολὰς καὶ τὰς πρὸς ἓκαστον τῶν θηρίων θαυμασίους τῶν γενναίων ὑπομονάς;
 οἷς γιγνομένοις καὶ αὐτοὶ παρῆμεν, ὁπηνίκα τοῦ μαρτυρουμένου σωτῆρος ἡμῶν, αὐτοῦ δὴ Ἰησοῦ Χριστοῦ, τὴν θείαν δύναμιν ἐπιδεικνῦσαν ἐναργῶς τε αὑτὴν τοῖς μάρτυσιν ἐπιδεικνῦσαν ἱστορήσαμεν, τῶν ἀνθρωποβόρων ἐπὶ πλείονα χρόνον μὴ προσψαύειν μηδὲ πλησιάζειν τοῖς τῶν θεοφιλῶν σώμασιν ἐπιτολμώντων, ἀλλ’ ἐπὶ μὲν τοὺς ἄλλους, ὅσοι δήπουθεν ἔξωθεν ἐρεθισμοῖς παρώρμων αὐτά, φερομένων, μόνων δὲ τῶν ἱερῶν ἀθλητῶν, γυμνῶν ἑστώτων καὶ ταῖς χεραὶν κατασειόντων ἐπί τε ἁφᾶς αὐτοὺς ἐπισπωμένων( τοῦτο γὰρ αὐτοῖς ἐκελεύετο πράττειν), μηδ’ ὅλως ἐφαπτομένων, ἀλλ’ ἒσθ᾿ ὅπη μὲν καὶ ἐπ’ αὐτοὺς ὁρμώντων, οἷα δὲ πρός τινος θειοτέρας δυνάμεως ἀνακρουομένων καὶ αὖ πάλιν εἰς τοὐπίσω χωρούντων·
 δ’ καὶ εἰς μακρὸν γινόμενον θαῦμα παρεῖχεν οὐ αμικὸν τοῖς θεωμένοις, ὥστε ἤδη διὰ τὸ ἄπρακτον τοῦ πρώτου δεύτερον καὶ τρίτον προσαφίεσθαι ἑνὶ καὶ τῷ αὐτῷ μάρτυρι θηρίον.
 cities and proninces and were distinguished in their martyrdoms.
 VII.
 We know atanyrate those of them who were conspicuous in Palestine, and we know aho those at Tyre in Phoenicia.
 who that saw them was not struck with amazwment at the numberless lashes and the stedfastness displayed under themby these truly marvellous champions of godliness;
 at the conflict with man- eating wild beasts that followed immendiately on the lashes;
 the attacks that then took place ofleopards and different kinds of bears, οf wild boars and bulls goaded with hot iron;
 and the marvellous endurance οf these noble persons when opposed to each οf the wild beasts? We ourselves were present when these things were happening, what time we beheld the present, divine powerof our sariour, Jesus christ Himself, the Objectof their wintness, and the clear manifestation of that power to the martyrs.
 The man- eating beasts for a considerable time did not dare to touch or even approach the bodies οf those who were dear to God, but made their attackson the others who presumably were provoking and urging them οn from the outside;
 while the holy champions were the only persons they did not reach at all, though they stood naked, waving their hands to drawa them οn to themselves( for this theywere commanded to do);
 and sometimes, when the beasts would make a rush at them, they wouldbe checked by,asit were, some divine power and once again retreat tothe rear.
 Αnd when this happened fora long time, it occasionedno small astonishment among the spectators, so that, as the first beast did nothing,a second anda third were let loose against one and the same martyr.
 Καταπλαγῆναι δ’ ἢν τὴν ἐπὶ τούτοις ἀπτόητον τῶν ἱερῶν ἐκείνων καρτερίαν καὶ τὴν ἐν σώμασι νέοις βεβηκυῖαν καὶ ἀδιάτρεπτον ἔνστασιν.
 ἑώρας γοῦν ἡλικίαν οὐδ’ ὅλων ἐτῶν εἴκοσι δίχα δεσμῶν ἑστῶτος νέου καὶ τὰς μὲν χεῖρας ἐφαπλοῦντος εἰς σταυροῦ τύπον, ἀκαταπλήκτῳ δὲ καὶ ἀτρεμεῖ διανοίᾳ ταῖς πρὸς τὸ θεῖον σχικαίτατα τεταμένου λιταῖς μηδ’ ὅλως τε μεθισταμένουμηδ’ ἀποκλίνοντός ποι τοῦ ἔνθα εἱστήκει τόπου, ἄρκτων καὶ παρδάλεων θυμοῦ καὶ θανάτου πνεόντων σχεδὸν αὐτῆς καθαπτομένων αὐτοῦ τῆς σαρκός, ὢ οὐκ οἱδ’ ὅπως θείᾳ καὶ ἀπορρήτῳ δυνάμει μόνον οὐχὶ φραττομένων τὸ στόμα καὶ αὖθις παλινδρομούντων εἰς τοὐπόσω.
 καὶ οὗτος μέν τις τοιοῦτος ἢν·
 πάλιν δ’ ἂν ἑτέρους εἶδες( πέντε γὰρ οἱ πάντες ἐτύγχανον) ἠγριωμένῳ ταύρῳ παραβληθέντας, ὃς τοὺς μὲν ἄλλους τῶν ἔξωθεν προσιόντων τοῖς κέρασιν εἰς τὸν ἀέρα ῥίπτων διεσπάραττεν, ἠμιθνῆτας αἴρεσθαι καταλιπών, ἐπὶ μόνους δὲ θυμῷ καὶ ἀπειλῇ τοὺς ἱεροὺς ὁρμῶν μάρτυρας οὐδὲ πλησιάζειν αὐτοῖς οἷός τε ἦν, κυρίττων δὲ τοῖς ποσὶν καὶ τοῖς κέρασιν τῇδε κἀκεῖσε χρώμενος καὶ διὰ τοὺς ἀπὸ τῶν καυτήρων ἐρεθισμοὺς θυμοῦ καὶ ἀπειλῆς πνέων εἰς τοὐπίσω πρὸς τῆς ἱερᾶς ἀνθείλκετο προνοίας, ὡς μηδὲ τούτου μηδὲν μηδαμῶς αὐτοὺς ἀδικήσαντος, ἕτερα ἄττα αὐτοῖς ἐπαφίεσθαι θηρία.
 τέλος δ’ οὖν μετὰ τὰς δεινὰς καὶ ποικίλας τούτων προσβολὰς ξίφει κατασφαγέντες οἱ πάντες ἀντὶ γῆς καὶ τάφων τοῖς θαλαττίοις παραδίδονται κύμασιν.
 VIII.
 καὶ τοιοῦτος μὲν ὁ ἀγὼν τῶν κατὰ Τύρον τοὺς ὑπὲρ εὐσεβείας ἄθλους ἐν·
 δειξαμένων Αἰγυπτίων.
 One might be astounded at the fearless and valiant bearing of those holy persons in the faceof these trials,and the steady, inflexible enduranee to be found in young bodies.
 For example, you might have seena youth, not twenty years old in all, standing unbound, his hands spread in the formofa cross, and, with a mind undismayed and unmoved, most leisurely engaged in earnest prayer to the Deity;
 never a with changing his ground or retreating from the plaee where he had taken his stand, while bears and leopards, breathing anger and death, almost touched his very flesh.
 Αnd yet, by a divine and mysterious powerI cannot explain, their mouths were muxxled, so to speak, and they ran baek again to the rear.
 Such a one was he.
 Again you might have seen others( for they werefive in all)thrown toamaddened bull, who, when others approached from the outside, tossed them into the air with his horns and mangled them, leaving them to be taken up half- dead;
 but when he rushed in threatening anger at the holy martyrs as they stood unprotected, he was unable evento approach them, though he pawed with his feet and pushed with his horns this way and that;
 and though the goading irons provoked him to breathe anger and threateninghe was dragged away backwards by Divine Prividence;
 so that otherwild beasts wereletloose against them, since the bull in no way did them the shghtest injury.
 Then at last, after the terrible and varied assaults of these beasts, they were all butehered with the sword, and insteadof being buried in the earth were committed to the waves of the Sea.
 VIII.
 Such was the contest of the Egyptians who at Tyre displayed their conffiets on behalf of piety.
 Θαυμάσειε δ’ ἄν τις αὐτῶν καὶ τοὺς ἐπὶ τῆς οἰκείας γῆς μαρτυρήσαντας, ἔνθα μυρίοι τὸν ἀριθμόν, ἄνδρες ἅμα γυναιξὶν καὶ παισίν, ὑπὲρ τῆς τοῦ σωτῆρος ἡμῶν διδασκαλίας, τοῦ προσκαίρου ξῆν καταφρονήσαντες, διαφόρους ὑπέμειναν θανάτους, οἳ μὲν αὐτῶν μετὰ ξεσμοὺς καὶ στρεβκλώσεις μάστιγάς τε χαλεπωτάτας καὶ μυρίας ὤας ποικίλας καὶ φρικτὰς ἀκοῦσαι βασάνους πυρὶ παραδοθέντες, οἳ δὲ πελάγει καταβροχθισθέντες, ἄλλοι δ’ εὐθαρσῶς τοῖς ἀποτέμνουσιν τὰς ἑαυτῶν προτείναντες κεφαλάς, οἳ δὲ καὶ ἐναποθανόντες ταῖς βασάνοις, ἕτεροι δὲ λιμῷ διαφθαρέντες, καὶ ἄλλοι πάλιν ἀνασκολοπισθέντες, οἳ μὲν κατὰ τὸ σύνηθες τοῖς κακούργοις, οἳ δὲ καὶ χειρόνως ἀνάπαλιν κάτω κάρα προσηΛωθέντες τηρούμενοί τε ζῶντες, εἰς ὅτε καὶ ἐπ’ αὐτῶν ἰκρίων λιμῷ διαφθαρεῖεν.
 ΙΧ.
 Πάντα δ’ ὑπεραίρει λόγον καὶ ἃς ὑπέμειναν αἰκίας καὶ ἀλγηδόνας οἱ κατὰ Θηβαίδα μάρτυρες, ὀστράκοις ἀντὶ ὀνύχων ὅλον τὸ σῶμα καὶ μέχρις ἀπαλλαγῆς τοῦ βίου καταξαινόμενοι, γύναιά τε τοῖν ποδοῖν ἐξ ἑνὸς ἀποδεσμούμενα μετέωρά τε καὶ διαέρια κάτω κεφαλὴν μαγγάνοις τισὶν εἰς ὕφος ἀνελκόμενα γυμνοῖς τε παντελῶς καὶ μηδ’ ἐπικεκαλυμμένοις τοῖς σώμασιν θέαν ταύτην αἰ.
 σχίστην καὶ πάντων ὠμοτάτην καὶ ἅπανθ’ ἀπανθρωποτάτην τοῖς ὁρῶσιν ἅπασιν παρεσχημένα·
 ἄλλοι δ’ αὖ πάλιν δένδρεσιν καὶ πρέμνοις ἐναπέθνῃσκον δεσμούμενοι·
 τοὺς γὰρ μάλιστα στερροτάτους τῶν κλά- δων μηχαναῖς τισιν ἐπὶ ταὐτὸ συνέλκοντες εἰς ἑκάτερά τε τούτων τὰ τῶν μαρτύρων ἀποτείνοντες σκέλη, εἰς τὴν ἑαυτῶν ἠφίεσαν τοὺς κλάδους But one must admire those of them also that were martyred in their own land, Where countless numbers, men, women and children, despising this passing life, endured various forms of death for the sake of οur Saniour's teaching.
 Some of them were committed to the flames after being torn and rackedand grievously seourged, and suffering other mainfold torments terrible to hear, while some were engulfedin the sea;
 others with a good courage stretched forth their heads to them that cut them off, or died inthe midst of their tortures, or perished of hunger;
 and others again were crucified, some as malefactors usually are, and some, even more brutally, were nailedinthe opposite manner, head- downwards,and kept alive until they should perish of hunger on the gibbet.
 IX.
 But it surpasses all description what the martyrs in the Thebais endured as regards both outrages and agonies.
 They had the entire body torn to pieees with sharp sherds instead of claws, even until life was extinct.
 Women Were fastened by one foot and swung aloft through the air, head- downwards,to a heightby certain machines, their bodies completely naked with not evena covering;
 and thus they presented this most disgraeerul, cruel and inhuman of all spectaclesto the whole company of onlookers.
 Others, again, were fastened to trees and trunks, and so died.
 For they drew together by certain machines the very strongestofthe branches, to eaeh of which they fastened one of the martyr's legs,and then released the branches to take up their Φέρεσθαι Φύσιν, ἄθρουν τῶν μελῶν διασπασμὸν καθ’ ὧν ταῦτ’ ἐνεχείρουν ἐπινοοῦντες.
 καὶ ταῦτά γε πάντα ἐνηργεῖτο οὐκ ἐπ’ ὀλίγας ἡμέρας ἢ χρόνον τινὰ βραχύν, ἀλλ’ ἐπὶ μακρὸν ὅλων ἐτῶν διάστημα, ὁτὲ μὲν πλειόνων ἢ δέκα, ὁτὲ δὲ ὑπὲρ τοὺς εἴκοσι τὸν ἀριθμὸν ἀναιρουμένων, ἄλλοτε δὲ οὐχ ἧττον καὶ τριάκοντα, ἤδη δ’ ἐγγύς που ἑξήκοντα, καὶ πάλιν ἄλλοτε ἑκατὸν ἐν ἡμέρᾳ μιᾷ ἄνδρες ἅμα κομιδῆ νηπίοις καὶ γυναιξὶν ἐκτείνοντο, ποικίλαις καὶ ἐναλλαττούσαις τιμωρίαις καταδικαζόμενοι.
 Ἱστορήσαμεν δὲ καὶ αὐτοὶ ἐπὶ τῶν τόπων γενόμενοι πλείους ἀθρόως κατὰ μίαν ἡμέραν τοὺς μὲν τῆς κεφαλῆς ἀποτομὴν ὑπομείναντας, τοὺς δὲ τὴν διὰ πυρὸς τιμωρίαν, ὡς ἀμβλύνεσθαι φονεύοντα τὸν σίδηρον ἀτονοῦντά τε διαθλᾶσθαι αὐτούς τε τοὺς ἀναιροῦντας ἀποκάμνοντας ἀμοιβαδὸν ἀλλήλους διαδέχεσθαι·
 ὅτε καὶ θαυμασιωτάτην ὁρμὴν θείαν τε ὡς ἀληθῶς δύναμιν καὶ προθυμίαν τῶν εἰς τὸν Χριστὸν τοῦ θεοῦ πεπιστευκότων συνεωρῶμεν.
 ἅμα γοῦν τῆ κατὰ τῶν προτέρων ἀποφάσει ἐπεπήδων ἄλλοθεν ἄλλοι τῷ πρὸ τοῦ δικαστοῦ βήματι Χριστιανοὺς ἁφᾶς ὁμολογοῦντες, ἀφροντίστως μὲν πρὸς τὰ δεινὰ καὶ τοὺς τῶν πολυειδῶν βασάνων τρόπους διακείμενοι, ἀκαταπλήκτως δὲ παρρησιαζόμενοι ἐπὶ τῆ εἰς τὸν τῶν ὅλων θεὸν εὐσεβείᾳ μετά τε χαρᾶς καὶ γέλωτος καὶ εὐφροσύνης τὴν ὑστάτην ἀπόφασιν τοῦ θανάτου καταδεχόμενοι, ὥστε ψάλλειν καὶ ὕμνους καὶ εὐχαριστίας εἰς τὸν τῶν ὅλων θεὸν μέχρις αὐτῆς ἐσχάτης ἀναπέμπειν ἀναπνοῆς.
 θαυμάσιοι μὲν οὖν καὶ οὗτοι, ἐξαιρέτωςδ’ ἐκεῖνοι θαυμασιώτεροι natural position:
 thus contriving the rending asunder all at once of the limbs of those who were the objects of this deviee.
 Αnd indeed all these thing were done,not forafew days orforsome brief space, but fora long period extending over whole years— sometimes morethan ten, at other times above twenty persons being put to death;
 and at others notlessthan thirty,now nearer sixty, and again at other timesa hundred men would be slain inasingle( lay, along with quite young children and women, being condemned to manifold punishments which followed one on the other.
 Αnd we ourselves also beheld, when we were at these places, many all at once ina single day, some ofwhom suffered decapitation, others,the punishment of fire;
 so that the murderousaxewas dulled and, worn out, was brokenin pieces, while the executioners themselves grew utterly weary and took it in turns to succeed one another.
 Ιt was then that we observed a most marvellous eagerness anda truly divine power and zeal in those who had placed their faith in the Christ of God.
 Thus, as soon as sentence was given against the first, some from one quarter and others from another Would leap up to the tribunal before the judge and confess themselves Christians;
 paying no heed when faced with terrors and the varied forms of tortures, but undismayedly and boldly speaking of the piety towards the Godof the universe, and with joy and laughter and gladness receiving the rinal sentence of death;
 so that theysangand sent up hymnsandthanksgivings to theGodof the universe eventothe very last breath.
 Αnd while these indeed were marvellous, those especially were marvellous who were distinguished οἱ πλούτῳ μὲν καὶ εὐγενείᾳ καὶ δόξη λόγῳ τε καὶ φιλοσοφίᾳ διαπρέψαντες, πάντα γε μὴν θέμενοι τῆς ἀληθοῦς εὐσεβείας καὶ τῆς εἰς τὸν σωτῆρα καὶ κύριον ἡμῶν Ἰησοῦν χριστὸν πίστεως, οἷος Φιλόρωμος ἢν, ἀρχήν τινα οὐ τὴν τυχοῦσαν τῆς κατ’ Ἀλεξάνδρειαν βασιλικῆς διοικήσεως ἐγκεχειρισμένος, ὃς μετὰ τοῦ ἀξιώματος καὶ τῆς Ῥωμαϊκῆς τιμῆς, ὑπὸ στρατιώταις δορυφόρου·
 μένος, ἑκάστης ἀνεκρίνετο ἡμέρας, Φιλέας τε τῆς Θμουϊτῶν ἐκκΛησίας ἐπίσκοπος, διαπρέψας ἀνὴρ ταῖς κατὰ τὴν πατρίδα πολιτείαις τε καὶ λειτουργίαις ἔν τε τοῖς κατὰ φιλοσοφίαν λόγοις·
 οἳ καὶ μυρίων ὅσων πρὸς αἵματός τε καὶ τῶν ἄλλων φίλων ἀντιβολούντων, ἔτι μὴν τῶν ἐπ’ ἀξίας ἀρχόντων, πρὸς δὲ καὶ αὐτοῦ τοῦ δικαστοῦ παρακαλοῦντος ὡς ἂν αὐτῶν οἶκτον λάβοιεν φειδώ τε παίδων καὶ γυναικῶν ποιήσοιντο, οὐδαμῶς πρὸς τῶν τοσούτων ἐπὶ τὸ φιλοζωῆσαι μὲν ἑλέσθαι, καταφρονῆσαι δὲ τῶν περὶ ὁμολογίας καὶ ἀρνήσεως τοῦ σωτῆρος ἡμῶν θεσμῶν ὑπήχθησαν, ἀνδρείῳ δὲ λογισμῷ καὶ φιλοσόφῳ μᾶλλον δὲ εὐσεβεῖ καὶ φιλοθέῳ ψυχῇ πρὸς ἀπάσας τοῦ δικαστοῦ τάς τε ἀπειλὰς καὶ τὰς ὕβρεις ἐνστάντες, ἄμφω τὰς κεφαλὰς ἀπετμήθησαν.
 Χ, Ἐπεὶ δὲ καὶ τῶν ἔξωθεν μαθημάτων ἕνεκα πολλοῦ λόγου ἄξιον γενέσθαι τὸν Φιλέαν ἔφαμεν, αὐτὸς ἑαυτοῦ παρίτω μάρτυς, ἅμα μὲν ἑαυτὸν ὅστις ποτ’ ἢν, ἐπιδείξων, ἅμα δὲ καὶ τὰ κατ’ αὐτὸν ἐν τῆ Ἀλεξανδρείᾳ συμβεβηκότα μαρτύρια ἀκριβέστερον μᾶλλον ἢ ἡμεῖς ἱστορήσων διὰ τούτων τῶν λέξεων.
 for wealth, birth and reputation, as also for learning and philosophy, and yet put everything second to true piety and faith in our Saniour and Lord Jesus Christ.
 Such was Philoromus;
 who had been entrusted with an office of no small importancein the imperialadministration at Alexandria, and who, in connexion with the dignity and rank that he had from the Romans, used to conduct judicia inquiries every day, attended bya bodyguard of soldiers.
 Such also was Phileas, bishop ofthe church ofthe Thmuites, 1 aman who was distinguishedforthe services he rendered to his country in public positions, and also for his skill in philosophy.
 Αnd though great numbers of relatives and other friends besought them, as well as many officials of high rank, and though the judge himself exhorted them to take pity on themselves and spare their children and wives, they could in no wise be induced by this strong pressure to decide in favour of love of life and despise the ordinances of our Saviour as to confessing and denying;
 but with a braveand philosophic resolution, nay rather, with a piousand godly soul, they stood firm against all the threats and insultsof the judge, and both were beheaded.
 X.
 But since we said 2 that Phileas deserveda high reputation for his secular learningas well, let him appear ashisown witness,to show uswho he was,and at the sametimeto relate, more accurately than we could, the martyrdoms that took place at Alexandria.
 ΑΙΙΟ ΤΩΝ ΦΙΛΕΟΥ ΙΙΡΟΣ ΘΜΟΥΙΤΑΣ ΓΡΑΜΜΑΤΩΝ“ Τούτων ἁπάντων ὑποδειγμάτων ἡμῖν καἰ ὑπογραμμῶν καὶ καλῶν γνωρισμάτων ἐν ταῖς θείαις καὶ ἱεραῖς γραφαῖς κειμένων, οὐδὲν μελλάσαντες οἱ μακάριοι σὺν ἡμῖν μάρτυρες, τὸ τῆς ψυχῆς ὄμμα πρὸς τὸν ἐπὶ πάντων θεὸν καθαρῶς τείναντες καὶ τὸν ἐπ’ εὐσεβείᾳ θάνατον ἐν νῷ λαβόντες, ἀπρὶξ τῆς κλήσεως εἴχοντο, τὸν μὲν κύριον ἡμῶν Ἰησοῦν Χριστὸν εὑρόντες ἐνανθρωπήσαντα δι’ ἡμᾶς, ἵνα πᾶσαν μὲν ἁμαρτίαν ἐκκόψῃ, ἐφόδια δὲ τῆς εἰς τὴν αἰώνιον ζωὴν εἰσόδου ἡμῖν κατάθηται·
 οὐ γὰρ ἁρπαγμὸν ἡγήσατο τὸ εἶναι ἴσα θεῷ, ἀλλ’ ἑαυτὸν ἐκένωσεν μορφὴν δούλου λαβών, καὶ σχήματι εὑρεθεὶς ὡς ἄνθρωπος ἑαυτὸν ἐταπείνωσεν ἕως θανάτου, θανάτου δὲ σταυροῦ·
 δι’ ὃ καὶ ζηλώσαντες τὰ μείζονα χαρίσματα οἱ χριστοφόροι μάρτυρες πάντα μὲν πόνον καὶ παντοίας ἐπινοίας αἰκισμῶν οὐκ εἰς ἅπαξ,ἀλλ’ ἤδη καὶ δεύτερόν τινες ὑπέμειναν, πάσας δὲ ἀπειλὰς οὐ λόγοις μόνον, ἀλλὰ καὶ ἔργοις τῶν δορυφόρων κατ’ αὐτῶν φιλοτιμουμένων, οὐκ ἐνεδίδουν τὴν γνώμην διὰ τὸ τὴν τελείαν ἀγάπην ἔξω βάλλειν τὸν φόβον·
 ὧν καταλέγειν τὴν ἀρετὴν καὶ τὴν ἐφ’ ἑκάστῃ βασάνῳ ἀνδρείαν τίς ἄν ἀρκέσειεν λόγος;
 ἀνέσεως γὰρ οὔσης ἅπασι τοῖς βουλομένοις ἐνυβρίζειν, οἱ μὲν ξύλοις ἔπαιον, ἕτεροι δὲ ῥάβδοις, ἄλλοι δὲ μάστιξιν, ἕτεροι δὲ πάλιν ἱμᾶσιν, ἄλλοι δὲ σχοινίοις.
 καὶ ἦν ἡ θέα τῶν αἰκισμῶν ἐνηλλαγμένη καὶ πολλὴν τὴν ἐν αὐτῇ κακίαν ἔχουσα.
 οἳ μὲν γὰρ ἀπίσω τὼ χεῖρε δεθέντες περὶ τὸ ξύλον ἐξηρτῶντο From the Writings of Phileas to the Thmuites.
“ Since all these examplesand patterns and goodly tokens are placed before us in the divine and sacred Scriptures, the blessed martyrs with us did not hesitate, but directed the eye of the soul sincerely toward the God who is over all, and witha mind resolved on deathfor piety they clung fast to their calling, finding that our Lord Jesus Christ became man for our sakes, that Ηe might destroy every kind of sin, and provide us with the means of entering into eternal life.
 For Ηe counted it nota prize to beonanequality with God, but emptied Ηimself, taking the form ofa servant;
 and being found in fashion asa man,Ηe humbled Himself unto death, yea,the death of the cross.
 Wherefore also, desiring earnestlythe greater gifts, the Christbearing martyrs endured every kind of suffering and all manner of devices of torture, not once, but evena second timein some cases;
 and though their guards vied in all kinds of threats against them, not only in word butalsoin deed, they refusedto give up their resolution, because perfeet love casteth out fear.
 What account would suffice to reckon up their bravery and courage under eaeh torture? For when all who wished were givena free handto insult them, some smote with cudgels, others with rods, others with scourges;
 others, again, with straps, and others with ropes.
 Αnd the spectacle of their tortures wasa varied one with no lack of wickedness therein.
 Some with both hands bound behind them were suspended upon the gibbet, and withtheaid οf certain καὶ μαγγάνοις τισὶ διετείνοντο πᾶν μέλος, εἴθ’ οὕτως διὰ παντὸς τοῦ σώματος ἐπῆγον ἐκ κελεύσεως οἱ βασανισταί, οὐ καθάπερ τοῖς φονεῦσιν ἐπὶ τῶν πλευρῶν μόνον, ἀλλὰ καὶ τῆς γαστρὸς καὶ κνημῶν καὶ παρειῶν τοῖς ἀμυντηρίοις ἐκόλαζον·
 ἕτεροι δὲ ἀπὸ τῆς στοᾶς μιᾶς χειρὸς ἐξηρτημένοι αἰωροῦντο, πάσης ἀλγηδόνος δεινοτέραν τὴν ἀπὸ τῶν ἄρθρων καὶ μελῶν τάσιν ἔχοντες·
 ἄλλοι δὲ πρὸς τοῖς κίοσιν ἀντιπρόσωποι ἐδοῦντο, οὐ βεβηκόσιν τοῖς ποσίν, τῷ δὲ βάρει τοῦ σώματος βιαζομένων μετὰ τάσεως ἀνελκομένων τῶν δεσμῶν.
 καὶ τοῦθ’ ὑπέμενον, οὐκ ἐφ’ ὅσον προσδιελέγετο οὐδ’ αὐτοῖς ἐσχόλαζεν ὁ ἡγεμών, ἀλλὰ μόνον οὐχὶ δι’ ὅλης τῆς ἡμέρας.
 ὅτε γὰρ καὶ ἐφ’ ἑτέρους μετέβαινεν, τοῖς προτέροις κατελίμπανεν ἐφεδρεύειν τοὺς τῆ ἐξουσίᾳ αὐτοῦ ὑπηρετουμένους, εἴ πού τις ἡττηθεὶς τῶν βασάνων ἐνδιδόναι ἐδόκει, ἀφειδῶς δὲ κελεύων καὶ τοῖς δεσμοῖς προσιένα καὶ μετὰ ταῦτα ψυχορραγῦντας αὐτοὺς κατατιθεμένους εἰς τὴν γῆν ἕλκεσθαι·
 οὐ γὰρ εἶναι κἄν μέρος φροντίδος αὐτοῖς περὶ ἡμῶν, ἀλλ’ οὕτω καὶ διανοεῖσθαι καὶ πράττειν, ὡς μηκέτ’ ὄντων, ταύτην δευτέραν βάσανον ἐπὶ ταῖς πληγαῖς τῶν ὑπεναντίων ἐφευρόντων.
 ἦσαν δὲ οἱ καὶ μετὰ τοὺς αἰκισμοὺς ἐπὶ τοῦ ξύλου κείμενοι, διὰ τῶν τεσσάρων διατεταμένοι ἄμφω τὼ πόδε, ὡς καὶ κατὰ ἀνάγκην αὐτοὺς ἐπὶ τοῦ ξύλου ὑπτίους εἶναι, μὴ δυναμένους διὰ τὸ ἔναυλα τὰ τραύματα ἀπὸ τῶν πληγῶν καθ’ ὅλου τοῦ σώματος ἔχειν·
 ἕτεροι δὲ εἰς τοὔδαφος ῥιφέντες ἔκειντο ὑπὸ τῆς τῶν machines stretched out in every limb;
 then, as theylayin this plight, the torturers acting on οrders begantolayon οvertheir whole body, not only, as inthe case murderers, punishing their sides with the instruments οf torture, but also their belly, legs and cheeks.
 Others were suspended from the porch hy one hand and raised aloft;
 and in the tension of their joints and limbs experienced unequalled agony.
 Others were bound with their face towards pillars, their feet not touching the ground, and thus their bonds were drawn tight by the pressure upon them of the weight οf the body.
 Αnd this they would endure, not whilethe governor conversed or was engaged with them, but almost throughout the entire day.
 For when he went awayto others, he would leave the agents of his authority to watchthe first,if perchance anyone should be overcome by the tortures and seem to give in;
 and he bade them approach mercilessly with bonds also, 1 and, when they were at the last gaspafter all this, take them down to the ground and drag them off.
 For he said that they were not to have the least particle of regard for us, but to be so disposed and act as if we were no longer of any account.
 Such was the second torture that our enemies devised in addition tothe stripes.
 Αnd some, even afterthe tortures, were placedin the stocks, and had both feet stretched οut to the fourth hole, so that they were compelled to lie on their back therein, being unable to sit upright because of the recent wounds they had from the stripes over the whole body.
 Others were thrown to the ground and lay there, by reason οf the whole βασάνων ἀθρόας προσβολῆς, δεινοτέραν τὴν ὄφιν τῆς ἐνεργείας τοῖς ὁρῶσιν παρέχοντες, ποικίλας καὶ διαφόρους ἐν τοῖς σώμασιν φέροντες τῶν βασάνων τὰς ἐπινοίας.
 τούτων οὕτως ἐχόντων οἳ μὲν ἐναπέθηῃσκον ταῖς βασάνοις, τῆ καρτερίᾳ καταισχύναντες τὸν ἀντίπαλον, οἳ δὲ ἡμιθνῆτες ἐν τῷ δεσμωτηρίῳ συγκλειόμενοι, μετ’ οὐ πολλὰς ἡμέρας ταῖς ἀλγηδόσι συνεχόμενοι ἐτελειοῦντο, οἱ δὲ λοιποὶ τῆς ἀπὸ τῆς θεραπείας ἐτελειοῦντο, τυχόντες τῷ χρόνῳ καὶ τῇ τῆς φυλακῆς διατριβὴ θαρσαλεώτεροι ἐγίνοντο.
 οὕτω γοῦν, ἡνίκα προσετέτακτο αἱρέσεως κειμένης ἢ ἐφαψάμενον τῆς ἐναγοῦς θυσίας ἀνενόχλητον εἶναι, τῆς ἐπαράτου ἐλευθερίας παρ’ αὐτῶν τυχόντα, ἢ μὴ θύοντα τὴν ἐπὶ θανάτῳ δίκην ἐκδέεσθαι, οὐδὲν μελλήσαντες ἀσμένως ἐπὶ τὸν θάνατον ἐχώρουν·
 ῇδεσαν γὰρ τὰ ὑπὸ τῶν ἱερῶν γραφῶν ἡμῖν προορισθέντα.
 ‘ ὁ γὰρ θυσιάζων,’ φησίν,‘ θεοῖς ἑτέροις ἐξολοθρευθήσεται,’ καὶ ὅτι οὐκ ἔσονταί ἀοῖ θεοὶ ἕτεροι πλὴν ἐμοῦ. ’
 ’ ’ τοιαῦται τοῦ ὡς ἀληθῶς φιλοσόφου τε ὁμοῦ καὶ φιλοθέου μάρτυρος αἱ φωναὶ ἃς πρὸ τελευταίας ἀποφάσεως, ὑπὸ τὴν δεσμωτικὴν ἔθ’ ὑπάρχων τάξιν, τοῖς κατὰ τὴν αὐτοῦ παροικίαν ἀδελφοῖς ἐπεστάλκει, ἅμα μὲν τὰ ἐν οἷς ἦν, ἀνατιθέμενος, ἅμα δὲ καὶ παρορμῶν αὐτοὺς ἐπὶ τὸ ἀπρὶξ ἔχεσθαι καὶ μετ’ αὐτὸν δάον οὔπω τελειωθησόμενον τῆς ἐν χριστῷ θεοσεβείας.
 ἀλλὰ τί χρὴ πολλὰ λέγειν καὶ καινοτέρας ἐπὶ καινοτέραις τῶν ἀνὰ τὴν οἰκουμένην θεοπρεπῶν μαρτύρων ἀθλήσεις παρατίθεσθαι, μάλιστα τῶν οὐκέτι μὲν κοινῷ νόμῳ, πολέμου δὲ τρόπῳ πεπολιορκημένων;
 sale application οf the tortures;
 presenting to those who saw them a sight more terrible than did the actual punishment, in that they bore on their bodies marks οf the manifold and varied tortures that were deVised.
 In this conditionof affairs, some died under their tortures, having shamed the adversary by their endurance;
 while others were shut up half deadin prison,and after not many days perfected by reason of their agonies;
 the remainder recovered under treatment, and as the result of time and their stay in prison gained confidence.
 So then, when the order was given and the choice held out, either to touch the abominable sacrifice and be unmolested, receiving from them the accursed freedom;
 or not to sacrificeand be punished with death:
 without hesitation they gladly went to their death.
 For they knew what had beenprescribedfor us by the sacred Scriptures.
 For he says, ‘ He that sacrificeth unto other gods shall be utterly destroyed᾿;
‘ Thou shalt have none other gods but me.
᾿ Such are the words of the martyr, true lover both οf wisdom andofGod, which he sent to the brethren in his community before the final sentence, when he was still in a state of imprisonment, at one and the same time showing the conditions in which he was living, and also stirring them up to hold fast to the fear of God in Christ, even after his death who was just about to be perfeeted.
 But Why need one makea long story and add fresh instance upon instance of the conflicts of the godly martyrs throughout the world, especially of those who were assailed no longer by the common law, but as if they were enemies? ΧΙ.
 Ἤδη γοῦν ὅλην Χριστιανῶν πολίχνην αὔτανδρον ἀμφὶ τὴν Φρυγίαν ἐν κύκλῳ περιβαλόντες ὁπλῖται πῦρ τε ὐφάψαντες κατέφλεξαν αὐτοῖς ἅμα νηπίοις καὶ γυναιξὶ τὸν ἐπὶ πάντων θεὸν ἐπιβοωμένοις, ὅτι δὴ πανδημεὶ πάντες οἱ τὴν πόλιν οἰκοῦντες λογιστής τε αὐτὸς καὶ στρατηγοὶ σὺν τοῖς ἐν τέλει πᾶσιν καὶ ὅλῳ δήμῳ Χριστιανοὺς ἁφᾶς ὁμολογοῦντες, οὐδ’ ὁπωστιοῦν τοῖς προστάττουσιν εἰδωλολατρεῖν ἐπειθάρχουν.
 καί τις ἕτερος‘ Ρωμαϊκῆς ἀξίας ἐπειλημμένος, Ἄδαυκτος τοὔνομα, γένος τῶν παρ’ Ἰταλοῖς ἐπιαήμων, διὰ πάσης προελθὼν ἀνὴρ τῆς παρὰ βασιλεῦσι τιμῆς, ὡς καὶ τὰς καθόλου διοικήσεις τῆς παρ’ αὐτοῖς καλουμένης μαγιστρότητοός τε καὶ καθολικότητος ἀμέμπτως διελθεῖν, ἐπὶ πᾶσι τούτοις διαπρέψας τοῖς ἐν θεοσεβείᾳ κατορθώμασιν καὶ ταῖς εἰς τὸν Χριστὸν τοῦ θεοῦ ὁμολογίαις, τῷ τοῦ μαρτυρίου διαδήματι κατεκοσμήθη, ἐπ’ αὐτῆς τῆς τοῦ καθολικοῦ πράξεως τὸν ὑπὲρ εὐσεβείας ὑπομείνας ἀγῶνα.
 ΧΙΙ.
 Τί με χρὴ νῦν ἐπ’ ὀνόματος τῶν λοιπῶν μνημονεύειν ἢ τὸ πλῆθος τῶν ἀνδρῶν ἀριθμεῖν ἢ τὰς πολυτρόπους αἰκίας ἀναζωγραφεῖν τῶν θαυμασίων μαρτύρων, τοτὲ μὲν πέλυξιν ἀναιρουμένων, οἷα γέγονεν τοῖς ἐπ’ Ἀραβίας, τοτὲ δὲ τὰ σκέλη κατεαγνυμένων, μένων, οἷα τοῖς ἐν Καππαδοκίᾳ συμβέβηκεν, καὶ ποτὲ μὲν κατὰ κεφαλῆς ἐκ τοῖν ποδοῖν εἰς ὕφος ἀναρτωμένων καὶ μαλθακοῦ πυρὸς ὑποκαιομένου τῷ παραπεμπομένῳ καπνῷ τῆς φλεγομένης ὕλης ἀποπνιγομένων, οἷα τοῖς ἐν XI.
 For instance, at this time armed soldiers surrounded a little town in Phrygia, of which the inhabitants were all Christians, every man of them, and setting fire to it burnt them, along with young children and women as they were calling upon the God who is over all.
 The reason of this was, that allthe inhabitants ofthe town toa man, the curator himself and the duumvirs with an the officials and the whole assembly, confessed themselves Christians and refused to give the least heed to those who bade them commit idolatry.
 Αnd there wasa certain other person who had attained toa high position under the Romans, Adauctus by name,a man of illustrious Italian birth;
 who had advanced through every grade of honour under the emperors, so as to pass blamelessly through the general administration οf what they call the magistracy and ministry of finance.
 Αnd besides all having dostinguished himself by his noble deeds οf godliness and his confessions οf the Christ οf God, he was adorned with the crownof martyrodom, enduring the conflict for piety while actually engaged as finance minister.
 XII.
 why needI now mentiontherest by name, οr number the multitude of the men, or picturethe varied tortures inflicted upon the wonderful martyrs? Sometimes they were slain with the axe, as was the case with those in Arabia;
 at other times they had their legs broken, as happened to those in Cappadocia;
 on some occasions they were suspended on highbythe feet,head- downwards, while a slow firewas kindled beneath, so that when the wood was alight they were choked by the rising smoke — a Μέση τῶν ποταμῶν ἐπήχθη, ποτὲ δὲ ῥῖνας καἰ ὦτα καὶ χεῖρας ἀκρωτηριαζομένων τά τε λοιπὰ τοῦ σώματος μέλη τε καὶ μέρη κρεουργουμένων, οἷα τὰ ἐπ’ Ἀλεξανδρείας ἦν;
 Τί δεῖ τῶν ἐπ’ Ἀντιοχείας ἀναζωπυρεῖν τὴν μνήμην, ἐσχάραις πυρὸς οὐκ εἰς θάνατον, ἀλλ’ ἐπὶ μακρᾷ τιμωρίᾳ κατοπτωμένων, ἑτέρων θᾶττον τὴν δεξιὰν αὐτῷ πυρὶ καθιέντων ἢ τῆς ἐναγοῦς θυσίας ἐφαπτομένων;
 ὧν τινες τὴν πεῖραν φεύγοντες, πρὶν ἁλῶναι καὶ εἰς χεῖρας τῶν ἐπιβούλων ἐλθεῖν, ἄνωθεν ἐξ ὑψηλῶν δωμάτων κατεκρήμνισαν, τὸν θάνατον ἅρπαγμα θέμενοι τῆς τῶν δυσσεβῶν μοχθηρίας.
 καί τις ἱερὰ καὶ θαυμασία τὴν τῆς ψυχῆς ἀρετήν, τὸ δὲ σῶμα γυνὴ καὶ τὰ ἄλλα τῶν ἐπ’ Ἀντιοχείας πλούτῳ καὶ γένει καὶ εὐδοξίᾳ παρὰ πᾶσι βεβοημένη, παίδων ξυνωρίδα παρθένων τῆ τοῦ σώματος ὥρᾳ καὶ ἀκμὴ διαπρεπουσῶν θεσμοῖς εὐσεβείας ἀναθρεψαμένη, ἐπειδὴ πολὺς ὁ περὶ αὐτὰς κινούμενος φθόνος πάντα τρόπον ἀνιχνεύων λανθανούσας περιειργάζετο, εἴτ’ ἐπ’ ἀλλοδαπῆς αὐτὰς διατρίβειν μαθὼν πεφροντισμένως ἐπὶ τὴν Αντιόχειαν ἐκάλει δικτύων τε ἤδη στρατιωτικῶν εἴσω περιβέβληντο, ἐν ἀμηχάνοις ἑαυτὴν καὶ τὰς παῖδας θεασαμένη καὶ τὰ μέλλοντα ἐξ ἀνθρώπων δεινὰ τῷ λόγῳ παραθεῖσα τό τε πάντων δεινῶν καὶ ἀφορητότερον, πορνείας ἀπειλήν, μηδὲ ἄκροις ὠσὶν ὑπομεῖναι δεῖν ἀκοῦσαι ἑαυτῇ τε καὶ ταῖς κόραις παρακελευσαμένη, ἀλλὰ καὶ τὸ προδοῦναι treatment meted οut to those in Mesopotamia;
 on others, the noses, ears and hands were mutilated, and the remaining limbs and parts οf the body cut up, as was done at Alexandria.
 Why need one rekindle the memory ofthose at Antioch, who were roasted οn heated gridirons,not unto death, but witha view to lengthy torture;
 and οf otherswhoput their right hand into the very fire sooner than touch the aecursed sacrifice? Some of them, to escape such trials, before they were caught and fell into the hands of those that plotted against them, threw themselves down from the topsοf lofty houses, regarding death asa prize snatched from the wickedness of evil men.
 Αnd a certain holy person, 1 admirable for of soul yet in bodya woman, and famed as well by all that were at Antioch for Wealth, birth and sound judgement, had brought up in the precepts of piety her two unmarried daughters, distinguished for the full bloom of their youthful beauty.
 Much envy was stirred up on their account, and busied itself in tracing in every manner possible where they lay concealed;
 and when it discovered that they were staying ina foreign country, of set purpose it recalled them to Antioch.
 Thus they fell into the soldiers’ toils.
 When, therefore,the woman that herself andher daughters werein desperate straits, she placed before them in conversation the terrible things that awaited them from human hands, and the most intolerable thing of all these terrors— the threatof fornication.
 she exhorted both herself and her giris that they ought not to submit to listen to even the least whisper of sucha thing,and said that to surrendertheir souls to the τὰς ψυχὰς τῆ τῶν δαιμόνων δουλείᾳ πάντων ὑπάρχειν θανάτων καὶ πάσης χεῖρον ἀπωλείας Φήσασα, μίαν τούτων ἁπάντων εἶναι λύσιν ὑπετίθετο τὴν ἐπὶ τὸν κύριον καταφυγήν, κἄπειτα ὁμοῦ τῇ γνώμη συνθέμεναι τά τε σώματα περιστείλασαι κοσμίως τοῖς περιβλήμασιν, ἐπ’ αὐτῆς μέσης γενόμεναι τῆς ὁδοῦ, βραχύ τι τοὺς φύλακας εἰς ἀναχώρησιν ὑποπαριτησάμεναι, ἐπὶ παραρρέοντα ποταμὸν ἑαυτὰς ἠκόντισαν.
 Αἵδε μὲν οὖν ἑαυτάς·
 ἄλλην δ’ ἐπ’ αὐτῆς Ἀντιοχείας παρθένων τὰ πάντα θεοπρεπῶν καὶ ἀληθῶς ἀδελφῶν, ἐπιδόξων μὲν τὸ γένος, λαμπρῶν δὲ τὸν βίον, νέων τοὺς χρόνους, ὡραίων τὸ σῶμα, σεμνῶν τὴν ψυχήν, εὐσεβῶν τὸν τρόπον, θαυμαστῶν τὴν σπουδήν, ὡς ἂν μὴ φερούσης τῆς γῆς τὰ τοιαῦτα βαστάζειν, θαλάττῃ ῥίπτειν ἐκέλευον οἱ τῶν δαιμόνων θεραπευταί.
 Ταῦτα μὲν οὖν παρὰ τοῖσδε·
 τὰ φρικτὰ δὲ ἀκοαῖς κατὰ τὸν Πόντον ἕπασχον ἕτεροι, καλάμοις ὀξέσιν τοῖν χεροῖν ἐξ ἄκρων ὀνώχων τοὺς δακτύλους διαπειρόμενοι, καὶ ἄλλοι, πυρὶ μολίβδου διατακέντος, βρασσούσῃ καὶ πεπυρακτωμένῃ τῇ ὕλη τὰ νῶτα καταχεόμενοι καὶ τὰ μάλιστα ἀναγκαιότατα τοῦ σώματος κατοπτώμενοι, διά τε τῶν ἀπορρήτων ἕτεροι μελῶν τε καὶ σπλάγχνων αἰσχρὰς καὶ ἀσυμπαθεῖς καὶ οὐδὲ λόγῳ ῥητὰς ὑπέμενον πάθας, ἃς οἱ γενναῖοι καὶ νόμιμοι δικασταὶ τὴν ἁφῶν ἐπιδεικνύμενοι δεινότητα, ὥσπερ τινὰ σοφίας ἀρετήν, φιλοτιμότερον ἐπενόουν, αἰεὶ ταῖς καινότερον φιλοτιμότερον αἰκίαις, ὥσπερ ἐν ἀγῶνος βραβείοις, ἀλλήλους ὑπερεξάγειν ἁμιλλώμενοι.
 slavery of demons was worse than all kinds or death and every form οf destruction.
 So she submitted that to flee to the Lord was the only way of eseape from it all.
 And when they had both agreed to her opinion, and had arranged their gannents suitably around them,on comingtothe middle of theirjourney they quietly requested the guards to allow thema little timefor retirement, and threw themselves into the river that flowed by.
 thus were these their own executioners.
 But another pair of maidens, also at Antioch, godly in every respectand true sisters, famous by birth, distinguished for their manner of life, young in years, in thebloom of beauty, grave οf soul, pious in their deportment, admirable in their zeal, the worshippers of demons commanded to be cast into the sea, as if the earth could not endure to bear such excellence.
 Thus it happened with these martyrs.
 Αnd others in Ρontus suffered things terrible to hear:
 sharp reeds were driven through their fingers under the tips of the nails;
 in the caseof others,lead was melted down by fire, and the boiling, burning stuff poured down their backs, roasting the most essential parts of their body;
 others endured in their privy parts and bowels sufferings that were disgraceful, pitiless, unmentionable,which the noble and lawabiding judges devised with more than usual eagerness, displaying their cruelty as if it were some great stroke of wisdom;
 striving to οutdo one another by everinventing novel tortures, as if contending for prizes ina contest.
 Τὰ δ’ οὗν τῶν συμφορῶν ἕσχατα, ὅτε δὴ ἀπειρηκότες ἐπὶ τῆ τῶν κακῶν ὑπερβολῇ καὶ πρὸς τὸ κτείνειν ἀποκαμόντες πλησμονήν τε καὶ κόρον τῆς τῶν αἱμάτων ἐκχύσεως ἐσχηκότες, ἐπὶ τὸ νομιζόμενον αὐτοῖς χρηστὸν καὶ φιλάνθρωπον ἐτρέποντο, ὡς μηδὲν μὲν ἔτι δοκεῖν δεινὸν καθ’ ἡμῶν περιεργάζεσθαι·
 μὴ γὰρ καθήκειν φασὶν αἵμασιν ἐμφυλίοις μιαίνειν τὰς πόλεις μηδ’ ὠμότητι τὴν ἀνωτάτω διαβάλλειν τῶν κρατούντων ἀρχήν, εὐμενῆ τοῖς πᾶσιν ὑπάρχουσαν καὶ πραεῖαν, δεῖν δὲ μᾶλλον τῆς φιλανθρώπου καὶ βασιλικῆς ἐξουσίας εἰς πάντας ἐκτείνεσθαι τὴν εὐεργεσίαν, μηκέτι θανάτῳ κολαζομένους·
 λελύσθαι γὰρ αὐτῶν καθ’ ἡμῶν ταύτην τὴν τιμωρίαν διὰ τὴν τῶν κρατούντων φιλανθρωπίαν.
 τηνικαῦτα ὀφθαλμοὺς ἐξορύττεσθαι καὶ τοῖν σκελοῖν πηροῦσθαι θάτερον προσετάττετο.
 ταῦτα γὰρ ἢν αὐτοῖς τὰ φιλάνθρωπα καὶ τῶν καθ’ ἡμῶν τιμωριῶν τὰ κουφότατα, ὥστε ἤδη ταύτης ἕνεκα τῆς τῶν ἀσεβῶν φιλανθρωπίας οὐκέτ’ εἶναι δυνατὸν ἐξειπεῖν τὸ πλῆθος τῶν ὑπὲρ πάντα λόγον τοὺς μὲν δεξιοὺς ὀφθαλμοὺς ξίφει πρότερον ἐκκοπτομένων κἄπειτα τούτους πυρὶ καυτηριαζομένων, τοὺς δὲ λαιοὺς πόδας κατὰ τῶν ἀγκυλῶν αὖθις καυτῆρσιν ἀχρειουμένων μετά τε ταῦτα τοῖς κατ’ ἐπαρχίαν χαλκοῦ μετάλλοις οὐχ ὑπηρεσίας τοσοῦτον δάον κακώσεως καὶ ταλαιπωρίας ἕνεκεν καταδικαζομένων πρὸς ἅπασί τε τούτοις ἄλλων ἄλλοις ἀγῶσιν, οὓς μηδὲ δυνατόν νικᾷ γὰρ πάντα λόγον τὰ κατ’ αὐτοὺς ἀνδραγαθήματα), περιπεπτωκοτων.
 Εν δὴ τούτοις ἐφ’ ὅλης τῆς οἰκουμένης διαλάμψαντες οἱ μεγαλοπρεπεῖς τοῦ Χριστοῦ μάρτυρες But the end οf thesecalamities came when they were now worn out with their excessive wickedness, and were utterly weary of killing and surfeited and sated with shedding blood, and so tumed to what they considered merciful and humane conduct;
 so that theyno longer thought that they were doing any harm to us.
 For it was not fitting, they said, to pollute the cities with the blood of their own people, or to involve ina charge of cruelty the supreme government of the rulers,a govemment thatwas well-disposed and mild towards all;
 but rather that the beneficence of the humane and imperial authority should be extended to all, and the death penalty no longer innicted.
 For they declared that thistheir punishment of ushadbeen stopped, thanks to the humanity of the rulers.
 Then orders were given that their eyes should be gouged out and one of their legs maimed.
 For this was in their opinion humanity and the lightest of punishments inflicted upon us.
 Hence, because of this humanity on the partof gomess men, it is now no longer possible to tell the incalculable number οf those who had their right eye first cut out with a sword and then cauterized with fire, and the left foot rcndered useless by the further application οf branding ironsto the joints, and who after this were condemned to the provincial copper mines, not so much for serrice as for ill- usage and hardship, and withal fell in with various other trials, which it is not possible even to recount;
 their brave and good deeds surpass all reckoning.
 In these conflicts verily the magnificent martyrs οf Christ were conspicuous throughout all the world, τοὺς μὲν ἁπανταχοῦ τῆς ἀνδρείας αὐτῶν ἐπόπτας εἰκότως κατεπλήξαντο, τῆς δὲ τοῦ σωτῆρος θείας ὡς ἀληθῶς καὶ ἀπορρήτου δυνάμεως ἐμφανῆ δι’ ἑαυτῶν τὰ τεκμήρια παρεστήσαντο.
 ἑκάστου μὲν οὖν ἐπ’ ὀνόματος μνημονεύειν μακρὸν ἄν εἴη, μή τί γε τῶν ἀδυνάτων.
 XIII.
 Τῶν δὲ κατὰ τὰς ἐπισήμους πόλεις μαρτυρησάντων ἐκκλησιασταικῶν ἀρχόντων πρῶτος ἡμῖν ἐν εὐσεβῶν στήλαις τῆς χριστοῦ βασιλείας ἀνηγορεύσθω μάρτυς ἐπίσκοπος τῆς Νικομηδέων πόλεως, τὴν κεφαλὴν ἀποτμηθείς, Ἄνθιμος,δ’ ἐπ’ Ἀντιοχείας μαρτύρων τὸν πάντα βίον ἄριστος πρεσβύτερος and,as was natural, everywhere filled with amazement the eye- witnesses οf their bravery;
 while in their own persons they furnisheda clear proof that the power of our Saviouris truly dirineand inexpressible.
 To mention, indeed, each by name would bea long task, to to say an impossibility.
 XIII.
 Of those rulers of the churches who were martyred in well- known cities, the first name that we must record on the monuments to holy men, as a martyr or the kingdom οf Christ, is that of Anthimus, bishop of the city οf the Nicomedians, who was beheaded.
 Of the martyrs at Antioch the best inhisentirelifewas Lucian,a presbyter of that community;
 the same who in Nicomedia, where the emperor was, proclaimed the heavenlykingdomof Christ, nrst by word οf mouth in an Apology, and afterwards also by deeds.
 Of the martyrs in Phoenicia the most famous would be the pastors of the spiritual flocks of Christ, beloved of God in all things, Tyrannion, bishop of the church at Tyre,and Ζenοbius, presbyter of the church at Sidon, and, moreover, Silvanus, bishop οf the churches about Εmesa.
 The last- named became food for wild beasts, along with others, at Emesa itself, and so was received up into the choirs of martyrs;
 the other two glorified the word οf God at Αntiοch by their endurance unto death;
 one of them, the bishop, being committed to the depths of the sea, while thatbestof physicians, Ζenobius, died bravely under the tortures that were applied to his sides.
 Of the martyrsinPalestine, Silvanus, bishop οfthechurches about Gaza, was beheaded at the coppermines at Phaeno, δέουσι τὸν ἀριθμὸν πεσσαράκοντα τὴν κεφαλὴν ἀποτέμνεται, Αἰγύπτιοί τε αὐτόθι Πήλευς καὶ Νεῖλος ἐπίσκοποι μεθ’ ἑτέρων τὴν διὰ πυρὸς ὑπέμειναν τελευτήν.
 καὶ τὸ μέγα δὲ κλέος τῆς Καισαρέων παροικίας ἐν τούτοις ἡμῖν μνημονευέσθω Πάμφιλος πρεσβύτερος, τῶν καθ’ ἡμᾶς θαυμασιώτατος, οὗ τῶν ἀνδραγαθημάτων τὴν ἀρετὴν κατὰ τὸν δέοντα καιρὸν ἀναγράφομεν.
 τῶν δ’ ἐπ’ Ἀλεξανδρείας καθ’ ὅλης τε Αἰγύπτου καὶ Θηβαΐδος διαπρεπῶς τελειωθέντων πρῶτος Πέτρος, αὐτῆς Ἀλεξανδρείας ἐπίσκοπος, θεῖόν τι χρῆμα διδασκάλων τῆς ἐν Χριστῷ θεοσεβείας, ἀναγεγράφθω, καὶ τῶν σὺν αὐτῷ πρεσβυτέρων Φαῦστος καὶ Δῖος καὶ Ἀμμώνιος, τέλειοι Χριστοῦ μάρτυρες, Φιλέας τε καὶ Ἡσύχιος καὶ Παχύμιος καὶ Θεόδωρος, τῶν ἀμφὶ τὴν Αἴγυπτον ἐκκλησιῶν ἐπίσκοποι, μυρίοι τε ἐπὶ τούτοις ἄλλοι διαφανεῖς, οἳ πρὸς τῶν κατὰ χώραν καὶ τόπον παροικιῶν μνημονεύονται·
 ὧν ἀνὰ τὴν πᾶσαν οἰκουμένην ὑπὲρ τῆς εἰς τὸ θεῖον εὐσεβείας ἠγωνισμένων γραφῆ παραδιδόναι τοὺς ἄθλους ἐπ’ ἀκριβές τε ἕκαστα τῶν περὶ αὐτοὺς συμβεβηκότων ἱστορεῖν οὐχ ἡμέτερον, τῶν δ’ ὄφει τὰ πράγματα παρειληφότων ἴδιον ἂν γένοιτο·
 οἷς γε μὴν αὐτὸς παρεγενόμην, τούτους καὶ τοῖς μεθ’ ἡμᾶς γνωρίμους δι’ ἑτέρας ποιήσομαι γραφῆς.
 κατά γε μὴν τὸν παρόντα λόγον τὴν παλινῳδίαν τῶν περὶ ἡμᾶς εἰργασμένων τοῖς εἰρημένοις ἐπισυνάψω τά τε ἐξ ἀρχῆς τοῦ διωγμοῦ συμβεβηκότα, χρησιμώτατα τυγχάνοντα τοῖς ἐντευξομένοις.
 Τὰ μὲν οὖν πρὸ τοῦ καθ’ ἡμῶν πολέμου τῆς Ῥωμαίων ἡγεμονίας, ἐν δάοις δὴ χρόνοις τὰ τῶν with others, in number forty save οne;
 and Εgyptians there, Ρeleus and Nilus, bishops,together with others, endured death by fire.
 Αnd mnong these we must mention the great glory of the community of Caesarea, Pamphilus,a presbyter,the most marvellous man of οur day;
 the merit of whose brave and good deeds we shall record at the proper time.
 Of those at Alexandriaandthroughout all Εgypt and the Thebais who were perfected gloriously, the first that must be recorded is Ρeter, bishop of Αlexandria itself,a divine exampleof the teachers οf godlines in Christ;
 and of the presbyters with him Faustus, Dius and Ammonius, perfect martyrs of Christ;
 and Ρhileas, Hesychius,Pachymius and Theodore, bishops ofthe churches in Egypt;
 and countless other famous persons as well, who are commemorated by the communitiesin their own districtand locality.
 It is not οur part to commit to writing the conflicts of those who fought throughout the world οn behalf οf piety towardthe Deity, and to record in detail each οf their happenings;
 but that would be the especial task of those who witnessed the events.
 YetI shall make known to posterity in another work1 those with whomI was personally conversant.
 In this present book, however,I shall subjoin to what has been said the recantation2 of the things that were wrought us, and au that befell sineethebeginningοf the persecution, most profitable as they are to my readers.
 Now as concerns the state of the Roman government before the war against us, during allthe periods ἀρχόντων φίλιά τε ἦν ἡμῖν καὶ εἰρηναῖα, ὁπόσης ἀγαθῶν εὐφορίας καὶ εὐετηρίας ἠξίωτο, τίς ἄν ἐξαρκέσειεν λόγος διηγήσασθαι;
 ὅτε καὶ οἱ μάλιστα τῆς καθόλου κρατοῦντες ἀρχῆς δεκαετηρίδας καὶ εἰκοσαετηρίδας ἐκπλήσαντες, ἐν ἑορταῖς καὶ πανηγύρεσιν φαιδροτάταις τε θαλίαις καὶ εὐφροσύναις μετὰ πάσης εὐσταθοῦς διετέλουν εἰρήνης.
 Οὕτω δ’ αὐτοῖς ἀπαραποδίστως αὐξούσης καὶ ἐπὶ μέγα ὁσημέραι προϊούσης τῆς ἀθρόως τῆς πρὸς ἡμᾶς εἰρήνης μεταθέμενοι, πόλεμον ἄσπονδον ἐγείρουσιν·
 οὔπω δ’ αὐτοῖς τῆς τοιᾶσδε κινήσεως δεύτερον ἔτος πεπλήρωτο, καί τι περὶ τὴν ὅλην ἀρχὴν νεώτερον γεγονὸς τὰ πάντα πράγματα ἀνατρέπει.
 νόσου γὰρ οὐκ αἰσίας τῷ πρωτοστάτῃ τῶν εἰρημένων ἐπισκηψάσης, ὑφ’ ἧς ἤδη καὶ τὰ τῆς διανοίας εἰς ἕκστασιν αὐτῷ παρήγετο, σὺν τῷ μετ’ αὐτὸν δευτερείοις τετιμημένῳ μένω τὸν δημώδη καὶ ἰδιωτικὸν ἀπολαμβάνει βίον·
 οὔπω δὲ ταῦθ’ οὕτω πέπρακτο, καὶ διχῇ τὰ πάντα τῆς ἀρχῆς διαιρεῖται, πρᾶγμα μηδ’ ἄλλοτέ πω πάλαι γεγονὸς μνήμῃ παραδεδομένον.
 χρόνου δ’ οὐ πλείστου μεταξὺ γενομένου βασιλεὺς Κωνστάντιος τὸν πάντα βίον πραότατα καὶ τοῖς ὑπηκόοις εὐνοικώτατα τῷ τε θείῳ λόγῳ προσφιλέστατα διαθέμενος, παῖδα γνήσιον Κωνσταντῖνον αὐτοκράτορα καὶ Σεβαστὸν ἀνθ’ ἑαυτοῦ thattherulers were friendlyand peaceably disposed toward us, no words could suffieiently deseribe how bountiful and plenteous was its harvest of good things;
 when also those who held the chiefest places in a world- empire completed the decennalia and vicennalia1 of their principate, and used to their days in festivals and public games, in the most joyous feasts and gaieties, possessing complete, wellestablished peace.
 But as their authority thus increased without let or hindrance and day by day waxed greater, all at once they departed from their peaceful attitude towards us and stirred upa relentless war.
 Αnd the second year2 of this kind οf movement οn their part hadnot fully expired, when a sort of revolution affecting the entire principate took place and threw the whole of public life into confusion.
 For a disease fell upon himwho stood first among those οf whom we spoke,3 which caused his mind to deranged;
 and, along with him who had been honoured with the second place after him, 4he resumed the ordinary life ofa private citizen.
 Αnd this had not yet takenplace, when the whole principate was rentin twain,a thing that had nevereven been recorded as having happened at any time in days gone by.
 5 But after no very great interval of time the Εmperor Constantius, who all his hfe long was most mildly and favourably disposed toward his subjects, and most friendly towards the divine word, died6 accordingto the common law of nature, leaving his lawful son Constantine Εmperor and Αugustus in his καταλιπών, κοινῷ φύσεως νόμῳ τελευτᾷ τὸν βίον, πρῶτός τε ἐν θεοῖς ἀνηγορεύετο παρ’ αὐτοῖς, ἁπάσης μετὰ θάνατον, ὅση βασιλεῖ τις ἂν ὠφείλετο, τιμῆς ἠξιωμένος, χρηστότατος καὶ ἠπιώτατος βασιλέων·
 ὃς δὴ καὶ μόνος τῶν καθ’ ἡμᾶς ἐπαξίως τῆς ἡγεμονίας τὸν πάντα τῆς ἀρχῆς διατελέσας χρόνον καὶ τἄλλα τοῖς πᾶσι δεξιώτατον καὶ εὐεργετικώτατον παρασχὼν ἑαυτόν τοῦ τε καθ’ ἡμῶν πολέμου μηδαμῶς ἐπικοινωνήσας, ἀλλὰ καὶ τοὺς ὑπ’ αὐτὸν θεοσεβεῖς ἀβλαβεῖς καὶ ἀνεπηρεάστους Φυλάξας καὶ μήτε τῶν ἐκκλησιῶν τοὺς οἴκους καθελὼν μήθ’ ἕτερόν τι καθ’ ἡμῶν καινουργήσας, τέλος εὔδαιμον καὶ τρισμακάριον ἀπείληφεν τοῦ βίου, μόνος ἐπὶ τῆς αὐτοῦ βασιλείας εὐμενῶς καὶ ἐπιδόξως ἐπὶ διαδόχῳ γνησίῳ παιδὶ πάντα σωφρονεστάτῳ τε καὶ εὐσεβεστάτῳ τε·
 λευτήσας.
 τούτου παῖς Κωνσταντῖνος εὐθὺς ἀρχόμενος βασιλεὺς τελεώτατος καὶ Σεβαστὸς πρὸς τῶν στρατοπέδων καὶ ἔτι πολὺ τούτων πρότερον πρὸς αὐτοῦ τοῦ παμβασιλέως θεοῦ ἀναγορευθείς, ζηλωτὴν ἑαυτὸν τῆς πατρικῆς περὶ τὸν ἡμέτερον λόγον εὐσεβείας κατεστήσατο.
 καὶ οὗτος μὲν τοιοῦτος·
 Λικίννιος δ’ ἐπὶ τούτοις ὑπὸ κοινῆς ψήφου τῶν κρατούντων αὐτοκράτωρ καὶ Σεβαστὸς ἀναπέφηνεν.
 ταῦτα Μαξιμῖνον δεινῶς ἐλύπει, μόνον Καίσαρα παρὰ πάντας εἰς ἔτι τότε χρηματίζοντα·
 ὃς δὴ οὖν τὰ μάλιστα τυραννικὸς ὤν παραρπάσας ἑαυτῷ τὴν ἀξίαν, Σεβαστὸς stead;
 and was the first of the new tetrarchy to be proclaimed amongthegodsby them,1 being deemed worthy of every honour after death that might be dueto an emperor, kindest and mildest of emperors that he was.
 Ηe indeed Wasthe only one of our contemporaries who passed the whole period of his principate ina manner worthy of his high office;
 and in other respeets displayed himselfina most favourableand beneficent light toward all;
 and he took no part in the war against us, but even preserved the God- fearing persons among his subjects from injury and harsh treatment;
 neither did he pull downthe church- buildings nor employ any other new deviee against us.
 so he hashad as his rewardahappy and thrice- blessed issue of his life;
 for he alone enjoyed a favourable and glorious end while he was still emperor, witha lawful son, in all respects most prudent and godly, to succeed him.
 Ηis son Constantine from the very hrst was proclaimed by the armies most perfect Emperorand Αugustus, and, long before them, by God Himselfe, the King supreme;
 and he set himself to be an emulatorof his father’s piety toward our doctrine.
 Sueh was he.
 And afterwards Licinius was declared Emperor and Augustus bya common voteof the rulers.
 2 These things caused great vexationto Maximin, since up to that timehewas still entitled only Caesar by all.
 Therefore, being above all thingsa tyrant,he fraudulently seized the honour for himself,and became Αugustus, appointed suchby him- ἦν, αὐτὸς ὑφ’ ἑαυτοῦ γεγονώς.
 ἐν τούτῳ δὲ Κωνσταντίνῳ μηχανὴν θανάτου συρράπτων ἁλοὺς ὁ μετὰ τὴν ἀπόθεσιν ἐπανῃρῆσθαι δεδηλωμένος αἰσχίστῳ καταστρέφει θανάτῳ·
 πρώτου δὲ τούτου τὰς ἐπὶ τιμῇ γραφὰς ἀνδριάντας τε καὶ δάα τοιαῦτα ἐπ’ ἀναθέσει νενόμισται, ὡς ἀνοσίου καὶ δυσσεβεστάτου καθῄρουν.
 XIV.
 τούτου παῖς Μαξέντιος, ὁ τὴν ἐπὶ Ῥώμης τυραννίδα τυραννίδα συστησάμενος, μὲν τὴν καθ’ ἡμᾶς πίστιν ἐπ’ ἀρεσκείᾳ καὶ κολακείᾳ τοῦ δήμου‘ Ρωμαίων καθυπεκρίνατο ταύτῃ τε τοῖς ὑπηκόοις τὸν κατὰ χριστιανῶν ἀνεῖναι προστάττει διωγμόν, εὐσέβειαν ἐπιμορφάζων καὶ ὡς ἄν δεξιὸς καὶ πολὺ πρᾶος παρὰ τοὺς προτέρους φανείη·
 οὐ μὴν οἷος ἕσεσθαι ἠλπίσθη, τοιοῦτος ἔργοις ἀναπέφηνεν, εἰς πάσαςδ’ ἀνοσιουργίας ὀκείλας, οὐδὲν ὅ τι μιαρίας ἔργον καὶ ἀκολασίας πάρα·
 λέλοιπεν, μοιχείας καὶ παντοίας ἐπιτελῶν φθοράς.
 διαζευγνύς γέ τοι τῶν ἀνδρῶν τὰς κατὰ νόμον γαμετάς, ταύταις ἐνυβρίζων ἀτιμότατα, τοῖς ἀνδράσιν αὖθις ἀπέπεμπεν, καὶ ταῦτ’ οὐκ ἀσήμοις οὐδ’ ἀφανέσιν ἐγχειρῶν ἐπετήδευεν, ἀλλ’ αὐτῶν δὴ μάλιστα τῶν τὰ πρῶτα τῆς ‘ Ρωμαίων συγκλήτου βουλῆς ἀπενηνεγμένων ἐμπαροινῶν τοῖς ἐξοχωτάτοις.
 οἱ πάντες δ’ αὐτὸν ὑποπεπτηχότες, δῆμοι καὶ ἄρχοντες, ἔνδοξοί τε καὶ ἄδοξοι, δεινῇ κατετρύχοντο τυραννίδι, καὶ οὐδ’ ἠρεμούντων καὶ τὴν πικρὰν φερόντων δουλείαν ἀπαλλαγή τις ὅμως ἢν τῆς τοῦ τυράννου Φονώσης ὠμότητος.
 ἐπὶ σμικρᾷ γοῦν ἤδη ποτὲ προφάσει τὸν δῆμον εἰς self.
 Αt this time he who had resumed offiee again after his1 abdication,aswe have shown, was discovered devisinga plot to securethedeath of Constantine, and dieda most shameful death.
 Ηe was the first emperor whose honorific inscriptions and statues and all sueh things as it has been customary to set up publicly they threw down, as belonging toan infamous and utterly godless person.
 XIV.
 Ηis son Maxentius, Who seeured for himself thetyrannyat Rome, at the beginning counterfeited our faith in order to please and fawn upon the Roman populace;
 and for this reason ordered his subjects to give over the persecution against Christians;
 for he was feigning piety and endeavouring to appear favourable and very mild above his predecessors.
 Yet his dees have not shown him to be such as it was hopedhe would be.
 Οn the eontrary, he drove headlong into every formof wickedness,and there is nota single abominableand dissolute aet that he has left undone, committing adulteries and all kinds of rape.
 In fact he used to separate from their husbands lawfully married women, insult them with the utmost dishonour, and send them back again to their husbands;
 and he made it his business thus to assail persons neither undistinguished nor obseure,but the most eminent of those who had attained the highest rank in the assemblyofthe Roman senate were the very and especial objects of his offensive behaviour.
 Αll cowered before him, people and rulers, famous and obscure, and were worn out by his terrible tyranny;
 and even though they remained quiet and endured the bitter servitude, srill there was no escape fromthe tyrant’s murderous cruelty.
 for example, on asmall pretence he gave the people φόνον τοῖς ἀμφ’ αὐτὸν δορυφόροις ἐκδίδωσιν, καὶ ἐκτείνετο μυρία τοῦ δήμου Ῥωμαίων πλήθη, ἐπὶ μέσης τῆς πόλεως, οὐ Σκυθῶν οὐδὲ βαρβάρων ἀλλ’ αὐτῶν τῶν οἰκείων δόρασι καὶ πανοπλίαις·
 συγκήτικῶν γε μὴν φόνος ὁπόσος δι’ ἐπιβουλὴν ἐνηργεῖτο τῆς οὐσίας, οὐδ’ ἐξαριθμήσασθαι δυνατόν, ἄλλοτε ἄλλαις πεπλασμέναις αἰτίαις μυρίων ἀναιρουμένων.
 ἡ δὲ τῶν κακῶν τῷ τυράννῳ κορωνὶς ἐπὶ γοητείαν ἤλαυνεν, μαγικαῖς ἐπινοίαις τοτὲ μὲν γυναῖκας ἐγκύμονας ἀνασχίζοντος, τοτὲ δὲ νεογνῶν σπλάγχνα βρεφῶν διερευνωμένου τε κατασφάττοντος καί τινας ἀρρητοποιίας ἐπὶ δαιμόνων προκλάσεις καὶ ἀποτροπιασμὸν τοῦ πολέμου συνισταμένου·
 διὰ τούτων γὰρ αὐτῷ τὰ τῆς νίκης κατορθωθήσεσθαι ἡ πᾶσα ἐτύγχανεν ἐλπίς.
 Οὖτος μὲν οὗν ἐπὶ Ῥώμαης τυραννῶν οὐδ’ ἔστιν εἰπεῖν οἷα δρῶν τοὺς ὑπηκόους κατεδουλοῦτο, ὡς ἤδη καὶ τῶν ἀναγκαίων τροφῶν ἐν ἐσχάτῃ σπάνει καὶ ἀπορίᾳ καταστῆναι, ὅσην ἐπὶ Ῥώμης οὐδ’ ἄλλοτε οἱ καθ’ ἡμᾶς γενέσθαι μνημονεύουσιν.
 Ὁ δ’ ἐπ’ ἀνατολῆς τύραννος Μαξιμῖνος, ὡς ἂν πρὸς ἀδελφὸν τὴν κακίαν, πρὸς τὸν ἐπὶ Ῥώμης φιλίαν κρύβδην σπενδόμενος, ἐπὶ πλεῖστον χρόνον λανθάνειν ἐφρόντιζεν·
 φωραθείς γέ τοι ὕστερον δίκην τίννυσι τὴν ἀξίαν.
 ἢν δὲ θαυμάσαι ὅπως καὶ οὗτος τὰ συγγενῆ καὶ ἀδελφά, μᾶλλον δὲ κακίας τὰ πρῶτα καὶ τὰ νικητήρια τῆς τοῦ κατὰ Ρώμην τυράννου κακοτροπίας γοήτων τε γὰρ καὶ μάγων οἱ πρῶτοι τῆς ἀνωτάτω οver to his bodyguardto be slaughtered, and immense numbers οf the Roman people were killed, in the mkidst οf the city, by the spears and arms, not of Scythians nor even of barbarians, but of their fellow- citizens.
 of a truth it would not even be possible to reckon how many senators were slaughtered because of designs on their wealth, for countless numbers were done away with for feigned reasons, varying according to circumstances.
 But the finishing touch οf all the tyrant’s evil deeds when he resorted to witchcraft:
 bent upon magic, at one time he would rip up pregnant women, at another explore the entrails of the new- born babes, slaughter lions, and invent certain abominable actionsto invoke demons, and asa sacrffice to avert war.
 For an his hope hy in these means of securing victory.
 Indeed, οne cannoteven mention the kind of things that this tyrant at Rome did to enslave his subjects;
 so that theywere actually reducedto such extreme scarcity and lack of even necessary food, as has never been known, according to οur contemporaries, either at Rome or elsewhere.
 But the tyrant in the Εast, Maximin, secretly forminga friendly alliance with the tyrant at Rome, as witha brother in wickedness, for a very long time thought that it was unknown.
 Αs a matterof fact, afterwards he was detected1 and paid the just It was marvellous how he acquireda family likeness and kinship with the villainy of thetyrant at Rome,nay rather, carried off the first prize for wickedness and the reward of victory over him.
 For it was the principal charlatans and magicians who were deemed EUSEBIUS παρ’ αὐτῷ τιμῆς ἠξίωντο, ψοφοδεοῦς ἐς τὰ μάλιστα καὶ δεισιδαιμονεστάτου καθεστῶτος τήν τε περὶ τὰ εἴδωλα καὶ τοὺς δαίμονας περὶ πολλοῦ τιθεμένου πλάνην·
 μαντειῶν γοῦν δίχα καὶ χρησμῶν οὐδὲ μέχρις ὄνυχος ὡς εἰπεῖν τολμᾶν τι κινεῖν οἷός τε ἦν·
 οὗ χάριν καὶ τῷ καθ’ ἡμῶν σφοδρότερον ἢ οἱ πρόσθεν καὶ πυκνότερον ἐπετίθετο διωγμῷ, νεὼς κατὰ πᾶσαν πόλιν ἐγείρειν καὶ τὰ χρόνου μήκει καθῃρημένα τεμένη διὰ σπουδῆς ἀνανεοῦσθαι προστάττων ἱερέας τε εἰδώλων κατὰ πάντα τόπον καὶ πόλιν καὶ ἐπὶ τούτων ἑκάστης ἐπαρχίας ἀρχιερέα τῶν ἐν πολιτείαις ἕνα γέ τινα τῶν μάλιστα ἐμφανῶς διὰ πάσης ἐμπρέψαντα λειτουργίας μετὰ στρατιωτικοῦ στίφους καὶ δορυφορίας ἐκτάσσων ἀνέδην τε πᾶσιν γόησιν, ὡς ἂν εὐσεβέσιν καὶ θεῶν προσφιλέσιν, ἡγεμονίας καὶ τὰς μεγίστας προνομίας δωρούμενος.
 ἐκ δὴ τούτων ὁρμώμενος, πόλιν μὲν οὐ μίαν οὐδὲ χώραν, ὅλας δὲ ἄρδην τὰς ὑπ’ αὐτὸν ἐπαρχίας χρυσοῦ καὶ ἀργύρου καὶ χρημάτων ἀμυθήτων εἰσπράξεσιν ἐπισκήψεσίν τε βαρυτάταις καὶ ἄλλοτε ἄλλαις καταδίκαις ἠνία καὶ κατεπίεζεν.
 τῶν γε μὴν εὐπόρων τὰς ἐκ προγόνων περιποιηθείσας οὐσίας ἀφαιρούμενος, πλούτους ἀθρόως καὶ σωροὺς χρημάτων τοῖς ἀμφ’ αὐτὸν κόλαξιν ἐδωρεῖτο.
 παροινίας γε μὴν καὶ μέθης ἐς τοσαύτην ἠνέχθη φοράν, ὡς ἐν τοῖς πότοις παρακόπτειν καὶ τῶν φρενῶν παρεξίστασθαι τοιαῦτά τε μεθύοντα προστάττειν, οἷα ἀνανήψαντα αὐτὸν τῆ ὑστεραίᾳ εἰς μετάμελον ἄγειν·
 κραιπάλης δὲ καὶ ἀσωτίας μηδενὶ καταλιπὼν ὑπερβολήν, κακίας διδάσκαλον τοῖς ἀμφ’ αὐτὸν ἄρχουσί τε καὶ ἀρχομένοις ἑαυτὸν καθίστη, θρύπτεσθαι μὲν τὸ worthy by him of the highest honour;
 he became exceedingly frightened at every noiseand superstitious,and attached great importance to error with regard to idolsand demons.
 For instance, without divinations and oracles he could not dare to move evena nail's breadth, ifI may say so.
 Accordingly, he applied himself to the persecution against us with more energy and persistence than those before him, ordering temples to be erected in every city and the sacred groves that had been destroyed through long lapse of time to be restored with all diligence;
 and he appointed idol priests in every locality and city, and over them as high priest of each province one οf those engaged in statecraft, who was the most manifestly distinguished in every branch of the public service, with an escort and bodyguard soldiers;
 and he recklessly bestowed governments and the greatest privilegeson all charlatans, as if they were pious and dear to the gods.
 Henceforward he vexed and oppressed, not asingle city nor even district, but the provinces under him completely and asa whole, by exactions of gold and silver and unspeakably large amounts of goods, and by the heaviest assessments and varied fines.
 Taking away from the wealthy the possessions they had gotten from their ancestors, he bestowed uponhis train of flatterers riches and heaps of goods ina gift.
 In truth he carried his drunken excesses to sucha point that he became mad and deranged in his cups, and when drunk would give such orders as he would repent of next day when he was sober.
 In debauchery and riotious living he suffered noneto surpass hm,but appointed himself instructorin villainy tothose around him, rulers and ruled alike.
 Ηe induced the στρατιωτικὸν διὰ πάσης τρυφῆς τε καὶ ἀκολασίας ἐνάγων, ἡγεμόνας δὲ καὶ στρατοπεδάρχας δι’ ἁρπαγῶν καὶ πλεονεξίας χωρεῖν κατὰ τῶν ὑπηκόων μόνον οὐχὶ συντυραννοῦντας αὐτῷ προκαλούμενος.
 τί δεῖ τὰς ἐμπαθεῖς τἀνδρὸς αἰσχρουργίας μνημονεύειν ἢ τῶν πρὸς αὐτοῦ μεμοιχευμένων ἀπαριθμεῖσθαι τὴν πληθύν;
 οὐκ ἢν γέ τοι πόλιν αὐτὸν παρελθεῖν μὴ οὐχὶ ἐκ παντὸς φθορὰς γυναικῶν παρθένων τε ἁρπαγὰς εἰργασμένον.
 κατὰ πάντων γέ τοι αὐτῷ ταῦτα προυχώρει, μὴ ὅτι μόνων Χριστιανῶν·
 οἳ θανάτου καταφρονήσαντες παρ’ οὐθὲν αὐτοῦ τὴν τοσαύτην ἔθεντο τυραννίδα.
 οἱ μὲν γὰρ ἄνδρες ἀνατλάντες πῦρ καὶ σίδηρον καὶ προσηλώσεις θῆράς τε ἀγρίους καὶ θαλάττης βυθοὺς ἀποτομάς τε μελῶν καὶ καυτῆρας καὶ ὀφθαλμῶν κεντήσεις τε καὶ ἐξορύξεις καὶ τοῦ παντὸς σώματος ἀκρωτηριασμοὺς λιμόν τε ἐπὶ τούτοις καὶ μέταλλα καὶ δεαμά, ἐπὶ πάντων μᾶλλον ὑπομονὴν τὴν ὑπὲρ εὐσεβείας ἐνεδείξαντο ἢ τὸ τὸ αέβας τὸ εἰς θεὸν εἰδώλοις ἀντικατηλλάξαντο·
 αἱ δ’ αὗ γυναῖκες οὐχ ἧττον τῶν ἀνδρῶν ὑπὸ τῆς τοῦ θείου λόγου διδασκαλίας ἠρρενωμέναι, αἲ μὲν τοὺς αὐτοὺς τοῖς ἀνδράσιν ἀγῶνας ὑποστᾶσαι ἴσα τῆς ἀρετῆς ἀπηνέγκαντο βραβεῖα, αἰ δὲ ἐπὶ φθορὰν ἑλκόμεναι θᾶττον τὴν ψυχὴν θανάτῳ ἢ τὸ σῶμα τῇ φθορᾷ παραδεδώκασιν.
 μόνη γοῦν τῶν ὑπὸ τοῦ τυράννου μεμοιχευμένων Χριστιανὴ τῶν ἐπ’ Ἀλεξανδρίας ἐπισημοτάτη τε καὶ λαμπροτάτη τὴν ἐμπαθῆ καὶ ἀκόλαστον Μαξιμίνου ψυχὴν δι’ ἀνδρειοτάτου παραστήματος ἐξενίκησεν, ἔνδοξος μὲν τὰ ἄλλα πλούτῳ τε καὶ γένει καὶ παιδείᾳ, πάντα γε μὴν δεύτερα σωφροσύνης τεθειμένη·
 ἢν army to become enervated as a resultof every kindof wanton excess;
 encouraging governors and commanders to proceed against their subjects with rapacity and extortion, almost asif they were his fellow- tyrants.
 Why need one recall the man 's disgraceful deeds of passion or reckon up the multitude οf those whom he debauched? In fact, he could not pass bya city without continually ravishing women and abducting virgins.
 Αnd in this he was successful with all, save only with Christians.
 Despising death they set at naught thishis fierce tyranny.
 For the men endured fire and sword and nailings;
 wild beasts and enguffing in the sea:
 cutting off and burningof limbs, stabbing and digging out of eyes, and mutilation of the whole body;
 and, in addition to these, hunger and mines and bonds:
 thus showing on all occasions that they preferred to endure for the sake of piety rather than transfer to idols the honour due to God.
 Αnd the women, on the other hand, showed themselves no less manly than the men, inspired by the teaching of the divine Word:
 some, undergoing the same contests as the men, won equalrewards for their valour;
 and others, when they were being dragged away to dishonour, yielded up their souls to death rather than their bodies to seduction.
 Α certain Christian lady,1 for example, most famous and distinguished among those at Αlexandria, alone of those whom the tyrant ravished conquered the lustful and licentious sould of Maximin by her brave spirit.
 Renowned though shewas for wealth, birth and education, she hadput everything second to modest behaviour.
 Μany a time he importuned καὶ πολλὰ λιπαρήσας, κτεῖναι μὲν ἑτοίμως θνῄσκειν ἔχουσαν οὐχ οἷός τε ἦν, τῆς ἐπιθυμίας μᾶλλον τοῦ θυμοῦ κατακρατούσης αὐτοῦ, φυγῇ δὲ ζημιώσας πάσης ἀφείλετο τῆς οὐσίας.
 μυρίαι δὲ ἄλλαι πρὸς τῶν κατ’ ἔθνος ἀρχόντων, πορνείας ἀπειλὴν μηδ’ ἀκοῦσαι δεδυνημέναι, πᾶν εἶδος βασάνων καὶ στρεβλώσεων καὶ θανατηφόρου κολάσεως ὑπέστησαν.
 Θαυμασταὶ μὲν οὖν καὶ αὗται, ὑπερφυῶς γε μὴν θαυμασιωτάτη ἡ ἐπὶ‘ Ρώμης εὐγενεστάτη τῷ ὄντι καὶ σωφρονεστάτη γυνὴ πασῶν αἷς ἐμπαροινεῖν ὁ ἐκεῖσε τύραννος Μαξέντιος, τὰ ὅμοια Μαξιμίνῳ δρῶν, ἐπειρᾶτο.
 ὡς γὰρ ἑπιστάντας τῷ οἴκῳ τοὺς τὰ τοιαῦτα τῷ τυράννῳ διακονουμένους ἐπύθετο Χριστιανὴ δὲ καὶ αὕτη ἦν), τόν τε ἄνδρα αὐτῆς, καὶ ταῦτα Ῥωμαίων ὄντα ἔπαρχον, τοῦ δέους ἕνεκα λαβόντας ἄγειν αὐτὴν ἐπιτρέψαντα, ἐς βραχὺ ὑποπαραιτησαμένη, ὡς ἂν δὴ κατακοσμηθείη τὸ σῶμα, εἴσεισιν ἐπὶ τοῦ ταμιείου καὶ μονωθεῖσα ξίφος καθ’ ἑαυτῆς πήγνυσιν, θανοῦσά τε παραχρῆμα, τὸν μὲν νεκρὸν τοῖς προαγωγοῖς καταλιμπάνει, ἔργοις δ’ αὐτοῖς ἁπάσης φωνῆς γεγωνοτέροις, ὅτι μόνον χρημάτων ἀήττητόν τε καὶ ἀνώλεθρον ἡ παρὰ Χρστιανοῖς ἀρετὴ πέφυκεν, εἰς πάντας ἀνθρώπους τούς τε νῦν ὄντας καὶ τοὺς μετὰ ταῦτα γενησομένους ἐξέφηνεν.
 τοσαύτη δῆτα κακίας φορὰ ὑφ’ ἕνα καὶ τὸν αὐτὸν συνηνέχθη καιρὸν πρὸς τῶν δύο τυράννων ἀνατολὴν καὶ δύσιν διειληφότων κατεργασθεῖσα·
 τίς δ’ ἂν τὴν τῶν τοσούτων διερευνώμενος αἰτίαν διατάξαι μὴ οὐχὶ τὸν καθ’ ἡμῶν διωγμὸν ἀποφήνασθαι ἀποφήνασθαι:
 ὅτε γε μάλιστα οὐ πρότερον τὰ τῆς τοσῆσδε πέπαυτο portuned her, yet was unable to put her to death though willing to die, for his lust overmastered his anger;
 but punishing her with exile he possessed himself of all her property.
Α great numberof others, unable even to listen toa threat fornication, underwent every form of the torure and racking and mortal punishment at the hands of the provincial governors.
 These indeed were wonderful, yet most surpassingly wonderful was that woman at Rome,1 truly the most noble and chaste of all those towards whom the tyrant there, Maxentius,in conduct like Maximin, attempted to act offensively.
 For when she learnt that at her house were those who ministered to the tyrant in such deeds( and she also wasa Christian), and that her husband, and hetooa prefect of the Romans, through fear had permitted them to take and lead her off, she begged to be excused fora brief space, as if forsooth to adorm her person, entered her chamber, and when alone transfixed herself witha sword.
 Αnd straightway dying she left her corpse to her procurers;
 but by deeds that themselves were more eloquent than any words she made it known to all men, both those present and thoseto come herearter, that a Christian's virtue isthe only possession that cannot be conquered or destroyed.
 To such an extent, in truth, did thetwo tyrants,who had divided among them Εast and West, carry the wickedness that they wrought at one and the same time.
 But who is there, in search for the reason of such evils, who would be at a loss to find it in the persecution against us? Especially as there was no cessation of this συγχύσεως ἢ Χριστιανοὺς τὰ τῆς παρρησίας ἀποΛαβεῖν.
 XV.
 Διὰ παντός γέ τοι τοῦ κατὰ τὸν διωγμὸν δεκαέτους χρόνου τῶν εἰς ἐπιβουλὴν καὶ πόλεμον τὸν κατ’ ἀλλήλων οὐδὲν αὐτοὺς διαλέλοιπεν.
 ἄπλωτα μὲν τὰ κατὰ θάλατταν ἦν οὐδ’ ἐξῆν ποθεν καταπλεύσαντας μὴ οὐχὶ πάσαις αἰκίαις ὑπάγεσθαι ατρεβλουμένους μένους καὶ τὰς πλευρὰς καταξαινομένους βασάνοις τε παντοίαις, μὴ ἄρα παρὰ τῶν δι’ ἐναντίας ἐχθρῶν ἥκοιεν, ἀνακρινομένους καὶ τέλος σταυροῖς ἢ τῆ διὰ πυρὸς ὑπαγομένους κολάσει·
 ἀσπίδων ἐπὶ τούτοις καὶ θωρήκων παρασκευαὶ βελῶν τε καὶ δοράτων καὶ τῆς ἄλλης πολεμικῆς παρατάξεως ἑτοιμασίαι τριήρων τε καὶ τῶν κατὰ ναυμαχίαν ὅπλων κατὰ πάντα συνεκροτοῦντο τόπον οὐδ’ ἢν ἄλλο τι παντί τῳ προσδοκᾶν ἢ πολέμων κατὰ πᾶσαν ἔφοδον ἡμέραν.
 τούτοις καὶ ὁ μετὰ ταῦτα λιμός τε καὶ λοιμὸς ἐγκατασκήπτει, περὶ ὧν κατὰ καιρὸν ἱστορήσομεν τὰ δέοντα.
 ΧVI.
 Τοιαῦτ ' ἦν τὰ διὰ παντὸς τοῦ διωγμοῦ παρατετακότα, δεκάτῳ μὲν ἔτει σὺν θεοῦ χάριτι παντελῶς πεπαυμένου, λωφᾶν γε μὴν μετ’ ὄγδοον ἔτος ἐναρξαμένου.
 ὡς γὰρ τὴν εἰς ἡμᾶς ἐπισκοπὴν εὐμενῆ καὶ ἵλεω ἡ θεία καὶ οὐράνιος χάρις ἐνεθδίκνυτο, τότε δῆτα καὶ οἱ καθ’ ἡμᾶς ἄρχοντες, αὐτοὶ δὴ ἐκεῖνοι δι’ ὧν πάλαι τὰ τῶν καθ’ ἡμᾶς ἐνηργεῖτο πολέμων, παραδοξότατα μεταθέμενοι τὴν γνώμην, παλινῳδίαν ἦδον Χρηστοῖς περὶ ἡμῶν προγράμμασιν καὶ διατάγμασιν ἡμερωτάτοις τὴν ἐπὶ μέγα ἁφθεῖσαν τοῦ διωγμοῦ πυρκαϊὰν σβεννύντες.
 οὐκ ἀνθρώπινον δέ τι τούτου κατέστη great state of confusion until Christians recovered their rights of freedom.
 XV.
 in fact, during the whole period of ten of persecution there was no respite in their plotting and warfare against each other.
 The seas were unnavigable, and none, no matterwhence they sailed, could escape being subjected to all kinds of torments:
 stretched on the rack and having their sides torn,and being examined under all sorts οf tortures in case they should possibly be coming from the enemy of the contrary part, and in the end subjected to crucifixion οr punishment by fire.
 Moreover, every placewas busy with the preparation of shields and armour, the getting ready of darts and spears and other warlike accoutrements, and of triremes and naval gear;
 and no one expected anything but an enemy attack all day long.
 Αnd subsequently the famine and pestilence broke out among them, about which we shall recount what is necessary at the proper time.
 XVI.
 Such was the state of affairs that continued throughout the whole persecution;
 which came completely to an end, by the grace of God, in the tenth year, 1 though indeed it began to abate after the eighth year.
 For when the divine and heavenly grace showed that it watched over us with kindly and propitious regard, then indeed our rulers also, those very persons who had long time committed acts οf war against us, changed theirmindin the most marvellous manner, and gave utterance toa recantation, quenching the fire of persecution that had blazed so furiously, by means of merciful edicts and the most humane ordinances.
 But this was not due toany human agency nortothe pity, as one αἴτιον οὐδ᾿ οἶκτος, ὡς ἄν φαίη τις, ἢ φιλανθρωπία τῶν ἀρχόντων·
 πολλοῦ δεῖ·
 πλείω γὰρ ὁσημέραι καὶ χαλεπώτερα ἀρχῆθεν καὶ εἰς ἐκεῖνο τοῦ καιροῦ τὰ καθ’ ἡμῶν αὐτοῖς ἐπενοεῖτο, ποικιλωτέραις μηχαναῖς ἄλλοτε ἄλλως τὰς καθ’ ἡμῶν αἰκίας ἐπικαινουργούντων·
 ἀλλ᾿ αὐτῆς γε τῆς θείας προνοίας ἐμφανὴς ἐπίσκεψις, τῷ μὲν αὐτῆς καταλλαττομένης λαῷ, τῷ δ᾿ αὐθέντη τῶν κακῶν ἐπεξιούσης καὶ πρωτοστάτῃ τῆς τοῦ παντὸς διωγμοῦ κακίας ἐπιχολουμένης.
 καὶ γὰρ εἴ τι ταῦτ᾿ ἐχρῆν κατὰ θείαν γενέσθαι κρίσιν, ἀλλά οὐαί, φησὶν ὁ λόγος, δι’ οὑ δ᾿ ἄν τὸ σκάνδαλον ἔρχηται.
 ” μέτεισιν δ᾿ οὖν αὐτὸν θεήλατος κόλασις, ἐξ αὐτῆς αὐτοῦ καταρξαμένη σαρκὸς καὶ μέχρι τῆς ψυχῆς προελθοῦσα.
 ἀθρόα μὲν γὰρ περὶ τὰ μέσα τῶν ἀπορρήτων τοῦ σώματος ἀπόστασις στασις αὐτῷ γίνεται, εἶθ᾿ ἕλκος ἐν βάθει συριγγῶδες καὶ τούτων ἀνίατος νομὴ κατὰ τῶν ἐνδοτάτω σπλάγχνων·
 ἀφ’ ὧν ἄλεκτόν τι πλῆθος σκωλήκων βρύειν θανατώδη τε ὀδμὴν ἀποπνεῖν, τοῦ παντὸς ὄγκου τῶν σωμάτων ἐκ πολυτροφίας αὐτῷ καὶ πρὸ τῆς νόσου εἰς ὑπερβολὴν πλήθους πιμελῆς μεταβεβληκότος, ἢν τότε κατασαπεῖσαν ἀφόρητον καὶ φρικτοτάτην τοῖς πλησιάζουσιν παρέχειν τὴν θέαν.
 ἰατρῶν δ᾿ οὖν οἳ μὲν οὐδ᾿ ὅλως ὑπομεῖναι τὴν τοῦ δυσώσοθς ὑπερβάλλουσαν ἀτοπίαν οἷοί τε, κατεσφάττοντο, οἳ δὲ διῳδηκότος τοῦ παντὸς ὄγκου καὶ εἰς ἀνέλπιστον σωτηρίας ἀποπεπτωκότος μηδὲν ἐπικουρεῖν δυνάμενοι, ἀνηλεῶς ἐκτείνοντο.
 might say, or humanity οf the rulers.
 Far from it.
 For from the beginning up to that time they were daily plotting further and severer measures against us;
 from time to time they were inventing fresh assaults upon us by means of still more varied devices.
 But it was due to the manifestation of the DIvine Providence itself, which,while it became reconciledto the people, attacked the perpetratorof thses evils, and was wroth with him as the chief author of the wickedness of the persecution asa whole.
 For verily, though itwas destined that these things should come to pass asa divine judgement, yet the Scripture says,“ Woe, through whomsoever the offence’’ 2Α divinely- sent punishment,I say, executed vengeance upon him, beginning at his very fleshand proceeding to the soul.
 For all at once an abscess appeared in the midst of his privy parts, then a deeply- seated fistular ulcer;
 which could not be cured and ate their way into the very midst οf his entrails.
 Hence there sprang an innumerable multitude οf worms, and a deadly stench was given off, since the entire bulk οfhismembers had, through gluttony, even beforethe disease, been changed into an excessive quantity of soft fat, which then became putrid and presented an intolerable and most fearful sight to those that came near it.
 Αs for the physicians, some of them were wholly unable to endure the exceeding and unearthly stench, and were butchered;
 others, who couldnot be ofanyassistance since the whole mass had swollen and reacheda point where therewas no hopeof recovery, were put to death without mercy.
 XVII.
 καὶ δὴ τοσούτοις παλαίων κακοῖς συναίσθησιν τῶν κατὰ τῶν θεοσεβῶν αὐτῷ τετολμημένων ἴσχει, συναγαγὼν δ’ οὖν εἰς ἑαυτὸν τὴν διάνοιαν, πρῶτα μὲν ἀνθομολογεῖται τῷ τῶν ὅλων θεῷ, εἶτα τοὺς ἀμφ’ αὐτὸν ἀνακαλέσας, μηδὲν ὑπερθεμένους τὸν κατὰ Χριστιανῶν ἀποπαῦσαι διωγμὸν νόμῳ τε καὶ δόγματι βασιλικῷ τὰς ἐκκλησίας αὐτῶν οἰκοδομεῖν ἐπισπέρχειν καὶ τὰ συνήθη δισπράττεσθαι, εὐχὰς ὑπὲρ τοῦ βασιλείου ποιουμένους, προστάττει.
 αὐτίκα γοῦν ἔργου τῷ λόγῳ παρηκολουθηκότος, ἥπλωτο κατὰ πόλεις βασιλικὰ διατάγματα, τὴν παλινῳδίαν τῶν καθ’ ἡμᾶς τοῦτον περιέχοντα τὸν τρόπον·
“ Αὐτοκράτωρ Καῖσαρ Γαλέριος Οὐαλέριος Μαξιμιανὸς ἀνίκητος Σεβαστός, ἀρχιερεὺς μέγιστος, Γερμανικὸς μέγιστος, Αἰγυπτιακὸς μέγιστος, Θηβαϊκὸς μέγιστος, Σαρματικὸς μέγιστος πεντάκις, Περσῶν μέγιστος δίς, ἑξάκις, Ἀρμενίων μέγιστος, Μηδῶν μέγιστος, Αδιαβηνῶν μέγιστος, δημαρχικῆς ἐξουσίας τὸ εἰκοστόν, αὐτοκράτωρ τὸ ἐννεακαιδέκατον, ὕπατος τὸ ὄγδοον, πατὴρ πατρίδος, ἀνθύπατος·
 καὶ Αὐτοκράτωρ Καῖσαρ Φλαύιος Οὐαλέριος Κωνσταντῖνος εὐσεβὴς εὐτυχὴς ἀνίκητος Σεβαστός, ἀρχιερεὺς μέγιστος, δημαρχικῆς ἐξουσίας, αὐτοκράτωρ τὸ πέμπτον, ὕπατος, πατὴρ πατρίδος, ἀνθύπατος.
 καὶ Αὐτοκράτωρ Καῖσαρ Οὐαλέριος Λικιννιανὸς Λικίννιος εὐσεβὴς εὐτυχὴς ἀνίκητος Σεβαστός, ἀρχιερεὺς μέγιστος, δημαρχικῆς ἐξουσίας XVII.
 Αnd wrestling with such terrible misfortunes hewas conscience- stricken for the cruel deeds he had perpetrated agninst the godly.
 collecting, therefore,his thoughts,he first openly confessed to the God οf the universe;
 then he called those around him, and commanded them without delayto cause the persecution against Christiansto cease, and by an imperial law and decree to urge them to build their churches and to performtheir accustomed rites, offering prayers on the Εmperor’s behalf.
 Action immediately followed his word, and imperial ordinances were promulgated in each city, containing the recantation οf the persecution edictsof οur time,after this manner :
“ The Emperor Caesar Galerius Valerius Maximianus Invictus Augustus, Pontifex Maximus, Germanicus Maximus, Aegyptiacus Maximus, Thebaicus Maximus, Sarmaticus Maximus five times, PErsicus Maximus twice, Carpicus Maximussix times, Armeniacus Maximus, Medicus Maximus, Adiabenicus Maximus, holding the Tribunician Power for the twentieth time, Emperor forthe nineteenth time, 1 Consulforthe eighth, Father of his country, Proconsul:
 2.
.
.
 Αnd the Emperor Caesar Flavius Valerius Constantinus Pius Felix Invictus Augustus, Pontifex Maximus, holding the Tribunician Power, Εmperοr forthe fifth time, Consul, Father οf his country, Proconsul:
 And the Εmperor Caesar Valerius Licinianus Licinius Pius Felix Invictus Augustus, Pontifex Maximus, holding the Tribunician ουσίας τὸ τέταρτον, αὐτοκράτωρ τὸ τρίτον, ὕπατος, πατὴρ πατρίδος, ἀνθύπατος, ἐπαρχιώταις ἰδίοις χαίρειν.
“ Μεταξὺ τῶν λοιπῶν, ἅπερ ὑπὲρ τοῦ χρησίμου καὶ λυσιτελοῦς τοῖς δημοσίοις διατυπούμεθα, ἡμεῖς μὲν βεβουλήμεθα πρότερον κατὰ τοὺς ἀρχαίους νόμους καὶ τὴν δημοσίαν ἐπιστήμην τὴν τῶν Ῥωμαίων ἅπαντα ἐπανορθώσασθαι καὶ πρόνοιαν ποιήσασθαι ἵνα καὶ οἱ Χριστιανοί, οἵτινες τῶν γονέων τῶν ἑαυτῶν καταλελοίπασιν τὴν αἵρεσιν, εἰς ἀγαθὴν πρόθσιν ἐπανέλθοιεν·
 ἐπείπερ τινὶ λογισμῷ τοσαύτη αὐτοὺς πλεονεξία κατεσχήκει καὶ ἄνοια κατειλήφει ὡς μὴ ἕπεσθαι τοῖς ὑπὸ τῶν πάλαι καταδειχθεῖσιν, ἅπερ ἴσως πρότερον καὶ οἱ γονεῖς αὐτῶν ᾖσαν καταστήσαντες, ἀλλὰ κατὰ τὴν αὐτῶν πρόθεσιν καὶ ὡς ἕκαατος ἐβούλετο, οὕτως ἑαυτοῖς καὶ νόμους ποιῆσαι καὶ τούτους παραφυλάσσειν καὶ ἐν διαφόροις διάφορα πλήθη συνάγειν.
 τοιγαροῦν τοιούτου ὑφ’ ἡμῶν προστάγματος παρακολουθήσαντος ὥατε ἐπὶ τὰ ὑπὸ τῶν ἀρχαίων κατασταθέντα ἑαυτοὺς μεταστήσαιεν, πλεῖστοι μὲν κινδύνῳ ὑποβληθέντες, πλεῖστοι δὲ ταραχθέντες παντοίους θανάτους ὑπέφερον·
 καὶ ἐπειδὴ τῶν πολλῶν τῆ αὐτῇ ἀπονοίᾳ διαμενόντων ἑωρῶμεν μήτε τοῖς θεοῖς τοῖς ἐπουρανίοις τὴν ὀφειλομένην θρῃσκείαν προσάγειν αὐτοὺς μήτε τῷ τῶν χριστιανῶν προσέχειν, ἀφορῶντες εἰς τὴν ἡμετέραν φιλανθρωπίαν καὶ τὴν διηνεκῆ συνήθειαν δι’ ἧς εἰώθαμεν ἅπασιν ἀνθρώποις συγγνώμην ἀπονέμειν, Ρower forthe fourth time, Emperor forthe third time, Consul, Father of his country, Proconsul:
 to the peopleof their provinces, greeting.
“ Among the other measures that we frame for the use and profit of the state, it had been our own wish formerly that all things should be set to rights in accordance with the ancient laws and public order of the Romans;
 and to makeprovision for this, namely, that the Christians also, such as had abandoned.
 the persuasion of their own ancestors, should return toa sound mind;
 seeing that through some reasoning they had been possessed of such self- will and seized with such folly2 that, instead of following the institutions of the ancients, which perchance their own forefathershad formerly established, they made for themselves,and were observing, laws merely in accordance with their own disposition and as eachone wished,and were assembing various multitudes in divers places:
 Therefore when a command of ours soonfollowed to the intent that they should betake themselves to the institutionsof the ancients, very many indeed were subjected to peril, while very many were harassed and endured all kinds of death;
 Αnd since the majority held to the same folly, and we perceived that they were neither paying the worship due to the gods of heaven nor honouring the god of the Christians;
 having regard to our elemeney and the invariable custom by which we are wontto accord pardonto all men, we thought it right in this καὶ ἐν τούτῳ τὴν συγχώρησιν τὴν ἡμετέραν ἐπεκτεῖναι δεῖν ἐνομίσαμεν, ἵνα αὗθις αὖθισ Χριστιανοὶ καὶ τοὺς οἴκους ἐν οἷς συνήγοντο, συνθῶσιν οὕτως ὥστε μηδὲν ὑπεναντίον τῆς ἐπιστήμης αὐτοὺς πράττειν.
 δι’ ἑτέρας δὲ ἐπιστολῆς τοῖς δικασταῖς δηλώσομεν τί αὐτοὺς παραφθλάξασθαι δεήσει·
 ὅθεν κατὰ ταύτην τὴν συγχώρησιν τὴν ἡμετέραν ὀφείλουσιν τὸν ἑαυτῶν θεὸν ἱκετεύειν περὶ τῆς σωτηρίας τῆς ἡμετέρας καὶ τῶν δημοσίων καὶ τῆς ἑαυτῶν, ἵνα κατὰ πάντα τρόπον καὶ τὰ δημόσια παρασχεθῇ ὑγιῆ καὶ ἀμέριμνοι ξῆν ἐν τῇ ἑαυτῶν ἑστίᾳ δυνηθῶσι.
" Ταῦτα κατὰ τὴν Ῥωμαίων φωνήν, ἐπὶ τὴν Ελλάδα γλῶτταν κατὰ τὸ δυνατὸν μεταληφθέντα, τοῦτον εἶχεν τὸν τρόπον.
 τί δὴ οὗν ἐπὶ τούτοις γίνεται, ἐπιθεωρῆσαι καιρός.
 case also to extend most willingly our indulgence:
 at Christians may exist again and build the houses in which they used to assemble, always provided that they do nothing contrary to order.
 In another letter we shall indicate to the judges how they should proceed.
 Wherefore, in accordanee with this our indulgence, they will be bound to beseech their οwn god for our welfare, and thatof the state, and their own;
 that in every way both the well being of the state may be secured, and they may be enabled to live free from care in their own homes.
" such is the character of this edict in the Latin tongue, transhted into Greek as well as may be.
 Now it is time to consider carefully what happened subsequently.
 THE APPENDIX TO BOOK VIII( found in codd.
 AER).
 1 Ἀλλ’ ὁ μὲν τῆς γραφῆς αἴτιος μετὰ τὴν τοιάνδε ὁμολογίαν αὐτίκα καὶ οὐκ εἰς μακρὸν τῶν ἀλγηδόνων ἀπαλλαγεὶς μεταλλάττει τὸν βίον.
 τοῦτον δὴ λόγος ἔχει πρῶτον αἴτιον τῆς τοῦ διωγμοῦ καταστῆναι συμφορᾶς, ἔτι πάλαι πρὸ τῆς τῶν λοιπῶν βασιλέων κινήσεως τοὺς ἐν στρατείαις Χριστιανοὺς καὶ πρώτους γε ἁπάντων τοὺς ἐπὶ τοῦ ἰδίου οἴκου παρατρέπειν ἐκβεβιασμένον καὶ τοὺς μὲν ἐκ τῆς στρατιωτικῆς ἀξίας ἀποκινοῦντα, τοὺς δὲ ἀτιμότατα καθυβρίζοντα, ἤδη δὲ καὶ θάνατον ἑτέροις ἐπαρτῶντα καὶ τοὔσχατόν γε τοὺς τῆς βασιλείας κοινωνοὺς ἐπὶ τὸν κατὰ πάντων ἀνακεκινηκότα διωγμόν·
 ὧν καὶ αὐτῶν οὐκ ἄξιον τὸ τοῦ βίου τέλος παραδοῦναι σιωπῇ.
 τεττάρων οὖν τὴν κατὰ πάντων διειληχότων ἀρχήν, οἳ μὲν χρόνῳ καὶ τιμὴ προηγούμενοι οὐδ’ ὅλοις δυεῖν ἔτεσιν ἐπιγενόμενοι τῷ διωγμῷ μεθίστανται τῆς βασιλείας, ᾖ καὶ πρόσθεν ἡμῖν δεδήλωται, καὶ δὴ τὸν ἐπίλοιπον τοῦ βίου χρόνον δημώδει καὶ ἰδιωτικῷ τρόπῳ διαγενόμενοι τέλος τοιόνδε τῆς ζωῆς εἰλήχασιν, ὁ μὲν τιμῇ τε καὶ χρόνῳ τῶν πρωτείων ἠξιωμένος μακρᾷ καὶ ἐπιλυποτάτῃ τῇ τοῦ σώματος ἀσθενείᾳ διεργασθείς, ὁ δὲ τὰ δεύτερα αὐτοῦ φέρων ἀγχόνῃ τὴν ζωὴν ἀπορρήξας, κατά But the author or the edict, arter sucha confession, was immediately, though not for long, released from his pains, and so departed this life.
 It is reeorded that this same person was the prime author of the calamity of the persecution;
 since long before the movement of the other emperors he had used force to turn aside from the faith the Christians in the— and, first of all, those in hisown house— degrading some from their military rank, and heaping the most shameful insults on others;
 and since he was already threatening others even with death, and, finally, had stirred up his partners in the principate to the general perseeution.
 Ιt is not possible to pass over the ends of these same emperors in silence.
 Four, then, had divided the supreme povwer between them.
 Those who were the more advanced in age and honour2 retired from the principate not two whole years after the persecution began, as wehave already stated, and passedthe remainder of theirexistencelike ordinary, private citizens.
 The end of their lives fell out thus.
 The one who had attained the chief place in honour and age 3 fella victim toa prolonged and most painful infirmity of the body;
 while he who held the second place to him4 ended his life by τινα δαιμονίαν προσημείωσιν τοῦτο παθὼν διὰ πλείατας αὐτῷ τετολμημένας ῥᾳδιουργίας.
 τῶν δὲ μετὰ τούτους ὁ μὲν ὕστατος, ὃν δὴ καὶ ἀρχηγὸν τοῦ παντὸς ἔφαμεν γεγονέναι διωγμοῦ, τοιαῦτα οἷα καὶ προδεδηλώκαμεν πέπονθεν, ὁ δὲ τοῦτον προάγων χρηστότατος καὶ ἠπιώτατος βασιλεὺς Kωνατάντιος, ἐπαξίως τῆς ἡγεμονίας τὸν ἅπαντα τῆς ἀρχῆς διατελέσας χρόνον ἀλλὰ καὶ τἄλλα τοῖς πᾶσι δεξιώτατον καὶ εὐεργετικώτατον παπασχὼν ἑαυτόν, ἀτὰρ καὶ τοῦ καθ’ ἡμῶν πολέμου ἔξω γενόμενος καὶ τοὺς ὑπ’ αὐτὸν θεοσεβεῖς ἀβλαβεῖς καὶ ἀνεπηρεάατους διαφυλάξας καὶ μήτε τοὺς οἴκους τῶν ἐκκλησιῶν καθελὼν μήθ᾿ ἕτερόν τι μηδ᾿ ὅλως καθ’ ἡμῶν ἐπικαινουργήσας, τέλος εὔδαιμον καὶ τριαμακάριον ὄντως ἀπείληφεν τοῦ βίου, μόνος ἐπὶ τῆς αὐτοῦ βασιλείας εὐμενῶς καὶ ἐπιδόξως ἐπὶ διαδόχῳ τῆς βααιλείας γνησίῳ παιδὶ τὰ πάντα αωφρονεατάτῳ καὶ εὐσεβεστάτῳ τελευτήαας·
 δς εὐθὺς ἀρχόμενος βασιλεὺς τελεώτατος καὶ Σεβαατὸς πρὸς τῶν στρατοπέδων ἀναγορευθείς, ζηλωτὴν ἑαυτὸν τῆς πατρικῆς περὶ τὸν ἡμέτερον λόγον εὐσεβείας κατεστήσατο.
 τοιαύτη τῶν προαναγεγραμμένων τεττάρων ἡ τοῦ βίου ἔκβασις, κατὰ παρηλλαγμένους χρόνους γεγενημένη.
 τούδὴ μόνος ἔτι λιπὼν ὁ μικρῷ πρόαθεν ἡμῖν εἰρημένος αὺν τοῖς μετὰ ταῦτα εἰς τὴν ἀρχὴν εἰαποιηθεῖαι τὴν προδεδηλωμένην ἐξομολόγηαιν διὰ τοῦ προεκτεθέντος ἐγγράφου λόγου τοῖς πᾶσι φανερὰν κατεστήσαντο.
 strangling:
 suffering this fate, in accordance witha certain demoniacal predietion, for the numerous crimes he had perpetrated.
 Of those after them, he 1 who held the last Place- the same who was the orginator, as we stated, 2 οf the whole persecution— suffered the fate which we have mentioned above 2;
 but he who ranked next before him, that kindest andmildest οf emperors, Constantius, passed the whole eriod of his principate ina manner worthyofhis high office, and in other respects displayed himself ina most benencentand favourable light to all;
 yea, and he held himself aloof from thewar against us, and carefully preserved his God- fearing from injury and harsh treatment;
 neither did he pull downthe church- buildings nor employ any οther additional new device against us at all.
 So he hashad as his rewarda truly happy and thrice- blessed issueof his life;
 for he alone met witha favourable and glorious end while hewas still emperor, withalawful son, in all respects most prudent and godly, to succeed him in the office.
 Ηe from the very first was proclaimed by the armies most perfect Εmperor and Αugustus;
 and he set himself to be an emulator οf his father's piety towards our doctrine.
 Such was theissue whieh befell, at different times, the livesof the four men of whom we have written above.
 Of these same persons, he of whomwe spoke a little while ago alone still remained,3 and, in conjunction with those who subsequently were admitted to the principate, οpenly placed before all the aforesaid confession in the document document was set out above.
 Θݲ Τάδε καὶ ἡ ἐνάτη περιέχει βίβλος τῆς Ἐκκλησιαστικῆς ἱστορίας Aݲ Περὶ τῆς ἐπιπλάστου Bݲ Περὶ τῆς μετέπειτα Γݲ Περὶ τοῦ κατὰ Ἀντιόχειαν νεοπαγοῦς ζοάνου.
 Δݲ Περὶ τῶν καθ’ ἡμῶν Εݲ Περὶ τῶν ἐπιπλάστων ζݲ Περὶ τῶν ἐν τῷδε τῷ χρόνῳ Ζݲ Περὶ τῆς καθ’ ἡμῶν ἐν στήλαις Ηݲ Περὶ τῶν μετὰ ταῦτα συμβεβηκότων ἐν λιμῷ καὶ λοιμῷ πολέμοις.
 Θݲ Περὶ τῆς τῶν τυράννων καταστροφῆς βίου, καὶ οἵαις ἑχρήσαντο πρὸ τῆς τελευτῆς φωναῖς.
 Ιݲ Περὶ τῆς τῶν θεοφιλῶν βασιλέων νίκης.
 Ιݲ Αݲ Περὶ τῆς ὑστάτης ἀπωλείας τῶν τῆς ἐχθρῶν.
 CONTENTS OF BOOK IX The Ninth Book of the Ecclesiastical History contains the follorning:
 I.
 On the feigned relaxation.
 ΙΙ.
 οn the change for the worse that ensued.
 III.
 on the new- made idolat Αntiοch.
 IV.
 On the petitions against us.
 v.
 On the forged memoirs.
 VI.
 On Those who were martvred at this time.
 VII.
 On the document against us setupon tablets.
 VIII.
 On the subsequent evcnts, the famine pestilence and wars.
 IX.
 On the ofofthe tyrants᾿ lives, cxpressions they made use of before the end.
 X.
 On the victory of the God- beloved Εmperors.
 XI.
 On the final οn of the enemies οf godliness.
Θ Ι.
 Τὰ μὲν δὴ τῆς παλινῳδίας τοῦ προτεθέντος βασιλικοῦ νεύματος ἥπλωτο τῆς Ἀσίας πάντη καὶ πανταχοῦ κατά τε τὰς ἀμφὶ ταύτην ἐπαρχίας·
 ὧν τοῦτον ἐπιτελεαθέντων τὸν τρόπον αξιμῖνος, ὁ ἐπ’ ἀνατολῆς τύραννος, δυααεβέατατος εἰ καί τις ἄλλος, καὶ τῆς εἰς τὸν τῶν ὅλων θεὸν εὐσεβείας πολεμιώτατος γεγονώς, οὐδαμῶς τοῖς γραφεῖσιν ἀρεαθείς, ἀντὶ τοῦ προτεθέντος γράμματος λόγῳ προατάττει τοῖς ὑπ’ αὐτὸν ἄρχουσιν τὸν καθ’ ἡμῶν ἀνεῖναι πόλεμον.
 ἐπεὶ γὰρ αὐτῷ μὴ ἐξῆν ἄλλως τῆ τῶν κρειττόνων ἀντιλέγειν κρίαει, τὸν προεκτεθέντα νόμον ἐν παραβύατῳ θεὶς καὶ ὅπως ἐν τοῖς ὑπ’ αὐτὸν μέρεσιν μὴ εἰς προῦπτον ἀχθείη, φροντίσας, ἀγράφῳ προστάγματι τοῖς ὑπ’ αὐτὸν ἄρχουσιν τὸν καθ’ ἡμῶν διωγμὸν ἀνεῖναι προστάττει·
 οἳ δὲ τὰ τῆς παρακελεύσεως ἀλλήλοις διὰ γραφῆς ὑποαημαίνουαιν.
 ὁ γοῦν παρ’ αὐτοῖς τῷ τῶν ἐξοχωτάτων ἐπάρχων ἀξιώματι τετιμημένος Σαβῖνος πρὸς τοὺς κατ’ ἔθνος ἡγουμένους τὴν βααιλέως ἐμφαίνει γνώμην διὰ Ῥωμαϊκῆς ἐπιατολῆς·
 ἦς καὶ αὐτῆς ἡ ἑρμηνεία τοῦτον περιέχει τὸν τρόπον·
 “ Λιπαρωτάτη καὶ καθωσιωμένῃ απουδῇ ἡ θειότης τῶν δεσποτῶν ἡμῶν θειοτάτων αὑτοκρατόπων τῶν ἀνθρώπων τὰς διανοίας BOOK IX Ι.
 THE recantation of the imperial will set forth above 1 was promulgated broadcast throughout Αsia and in the neighbouring provinces.
 Αfter this had thus been done, Maximin,the tyrantofthe Εast,a monster οf imriety if evertherewas one, who had been the bitterest enemy οf piety toward the Godof the universe,Was by no means pleased with what was written, and instead οf making known the letter set forth above gave verbal commands to the rulers under him to relax the war against us.
 For since he might not otherwise gainsay the judgementof his superiors, he put in a corner the law set forth above;
 and, taking measures how it might never see the light of day in thedistricts under him, by an οral direction he commanded the rulers under him to relax the persecution against us.
 Αnd they intimated to each other in writing the terms of the οrder.
 Sabinus, for instance, whom they had honoured with the rank of most excellent prefect, made known the Εmperοr’s decision to the provincial governors in a latin epistle.
 The translation of the same runsas follows:
“ With a most eamest and devoted Ζeal the DirivInity οf our most divine masters, the Εmperors, has fora long time determinedto lead all men’s πρὸς τὴν ὁαίαν καὶ ὀρθὴν τοῦ ξῆν ὁδὸν περιαγαγεῖν ἔτι πάλαι ὥρισεν, ὅπως καὶ οἱ ἀλλοτρίᾳ Ῥωμαίων συνηθείᾳ ἀκολουθεῖν δοκοῦντες τὰς ὀφειλομένας θρῃακείας τοῖς ἀθανάτοις θεοῖς ἐπιτελοῖεν·
 ἀλλ’ ἡ τινῶν ἔνατααις καὶ τραχυτάτη βουλὴ εἰς τοσοῦτον περιέστη ὡς μήτε λογισμῷ δικαίῳ τῆς κελεύσεως δύνασθαι ἐκ τῆς ἰδίας προθέαεως ἀναχωρεῖν μήτε τὴν ἐπικειμένην τιμωπίαν αὐτοὺς ἐκφοβεῖν.
 ἐπειδὴ τοίνυν συνέβαινεν ἐκ τοῦ τοιούτου τρόπου πολλοὺς εἰς κίνδυνον ἑαυτοὺς περιβάλλειν, κατὰ τὴν προσοῦσαν εὐγένειαν τῆς εὐαεβείας ἡ θειότης τῶν δεαποτῶν ἡμῶν τῶν δυνατωτάτων αὐτοκρατόρων ἀλλότριον εἶναι τῆς προθέσεως τῆς θειοτάτης τῆς ἰδίας δοκιμάξουσα τὸ ἐκ τῆς τοιαύτης αἰτίας εἰς τοαοῦτον κίνδυνον τοὺς ἀνθρώπους περιβάλλειν, ἐκέλευσεν διὰ τῆς ἐμῆς καθοαιώαεως τῆ σῇ ἀγχινοίᾳ διαχαράξαι ἵν εἴ τις τῶν χριατιανῶν τοῦ ἰδίου ἔθνους τὴν θρησκείαν μετιὼν εὑρεθείη, τῆς κατ’ αὐτοῦ ἐνοχλήσεως καὶ τοῦ κινδύνου αὐτὸν ἀποατήσειας καὶ μή τινα ἐκ ταύτης τῆς προφάαεως τιμωρίᾳ κολαστέον νομίσειας, ὁπότε τῇ τοῦ τοσούτου χρόνου αυνελεύαει συνέστη αὐτοὺς μηδενὶ τρόπῳ πεπεῖσθαι δεδυνῆσθαι ὅπως ἀπὸ τῶν τοιούτων ἐνατάαεων ἀναχωρήσαιεν.
 γραφαὶ τοιγαροῦν πρὸς τοὺς λογιατὰς καὶ τοὺς στρατηγοὺς καὶ τοὺς πραιποσίτους τοῦ πάγου ἑκάστης πόλεως ἡ σὴ ἐπιστρέφεια ὀφείλει ἵνα γνοῖεν περαιτέρω αὐτοῖς τούτου τοῦ γράμματος φροντίδα ποιεῖαθαι μὴ προαήκειν.’
’ Ἐπὶ τούτοις οἱ κατ’ ἐπαρχίαν τὴν τῶν γραφέντων αὐτοῖς ἐπαληθεύειν προαίρεσιν νενομικότες, thoughts into the holy and right pathof life, so that those also who seemed to follow customs foreign to the Romans should perform the acts of worship due to the immortal gods.
 But the οbstinacy and most unyielding determination of some was carried to sucha length, that neither could they be tumed back from their οwn purpose by just reasoning embodied in the order, nor did they fear the punishment that threatened.
 Since therefore it has come about that many by such conduct endanger themselves, in accordance with the noble piety thatis theirs,the Divinityofour masters, the mostmighty Εmperors, deeming it foreign to their divine purpose that for sucha reason they should so greatly endanger these men, gave commandment through my Devotedness to writeto thy Intelligence, that ifanyof the Christiansbe found followingthe religion ofhis nation, thou shouldest set him free from molestation directed ngainst him and from danger, nor shouldest thou anyone punishable οn this charge, since so longa pnssage of time has proved that they can in no wise be persuaded to to such obstinate conduct.
 Let it be thy Solicitude's duty, therefore, write to the curators and the duumrirs and the magistrates of the district of every city, that theymay know thatit is not beseemingfor them to take any further notice οf that letter.
 ” 1 whereupon the rulers οf the provinces, having concluded that the purport οf what had been written λογισταῖς καὶ στρατηγοῖς καὶ τοῖς κατ’ ἀγροὺς ἐπιτεταγμένοις τὴν βασιλικὴν διὰ γραμμάτων ἑμφανῆ γνώμην·
 οὐ μόνονδ’ αὐτοῖς διὰ γραφῆς ταῦτα προυχώρει, καὶ ἔργοις δὲ πολὺ πρότερον, ὡς ἂν νεῦμα βααιλικὸν εἰς πέρας ἄγοντες, δάους εἶχον δεσμωτηρίοις καθειργμένους διὰ τὴν εἰς τὸ θεῖον ὁμολογίαν, εἰς φανερὸν προάγοντες ἠλευθέρουν, ἀνιέντες τούτων δὴ αὐτῶν τοὺς ἐν μετάλλοις ἐπὶ τιμωρίᾳ δεδομένους·
 τοῦτο γὰρ ἐπ’ ἀληθείας βασιλεῖ δοκεῖν ὑπειλήφααιν ἠπατημένοι.
 καὶ δὴ τούτων οὕτως ἐπιτελεσθὲν ἀθρόως οἷόν τι φῶς ἐκ ζοφερᾶς νυκτὸς ἐκλάμφαν, κατὰ πᾶσαν πόλιν συγκροτουμένας παρῆν ὁρᾶν ἐκκλησίας συνόδους τε παμπληθεῖς καὶ τὰς ἐπὶ τούτων ἐξ ἔθ’ οὑς ἐπιτελουμένας ἀγωγάς·
 καταπέπληκτο δ’ οὐ σμικρῶς ἐπὶ τούτοις πᾶς τις τῶν ἀπίστων ἐθνῶν, τῆς τοσαύτης μεταβολῆς τὸ παράδοξον ἀποθαυμάζων μέγαν τε καὶ μόνον ἀληθῆ τὸν χριστιανῶν θεὸν ἐπιβοώμενος.
 τῶν δ’ ἡμετέρων οἴ μὲν τὸν τῶν διωγμῶν ἀγῶνα πιστῶς καὶ ἀνδρικῶς διηθληκότες τὴν πρὸς ἅπαντας αὖθις ἀπελάμβανον παρρησίαν, ὅσοι δὲ τὰ τῆς πίστεως νενοσηκότες τὰς Ψυχὰς ἐτύγχανον κεχειμασμένοι, ἀσμένως περὶ τὴν ἁφῶν θεραπείαν ἔσπευδον, ἀντιβολοῦντες καὶ σωτηρίας δεξιὰν τοὺς ἐρρωμένους αἰτούμενοι τόν τε θεὸν ἵλεων αὐτοῖς γενέσθαι καθικετεύοντες·
 εἶτα δὲ καὶ οἱ γενναῖοι τῆς θεοσεβείασ ἀθληταὶ τῆς εἰς τὰ μέταλλα κακοπαθείας ἐλευθερούμενοι ἐπὶ τὰς αὐτῶν ἐστέλλοντο, γαῦροι καὶ φαιδροὶ διὰ πάσης ἰόντες πόλεως εὐφροσύνης τε ἀλέκτου καὶ ἢν οὐδὲ λόγῳ δυνατὸν εὐφροσύνης παρρησίας ἔμπλεοι.
 στίφη δ’ οὖν πολυάνθρωπα to them wasa genuine expression, made known by means of letters the imperial resolve to curators, dumnvirs and rural magistrates.
 Αnd not only did they further these measures by writing, but also much more so by action.
 With a view to carrying outthe imperial will, as manyas they kept shut up prisons for for their confession οf the Deity they brought into the light of day and set free, releasing suchof these same persons as were consigned to the mines for punishment.
 For this, in truth, they mistakenly conceived to be the Emperor's Αnd when these thingshad thus been carried into effect, as though some light shined forth all at once out ofa gloomy night, one might see churches thronged in every city, and crowded assemblies, and the rites perfonned thereat in the customary manner.
 Αnd every single one οf the unbelieving heathen was in no small degree amazed at these happenings, marvelling at the miracle of of great a change, and extolling the Christians᾿ God as God as great and ofοur οwn people, those whohad faithfully and bravely contended throughout the conffict οf persecutions οnee more resumed their conhdent bearing in the sight of all;
 but those whoSe faith had been ffiseased and souls stonn- tost eageriy srtove for their own heahng, beseeching and begging the strong for the right hand of safety, and supplicatingGodto be mereifulto them.
 Αnd then also the noble champions οf godliness, freed from their evil plight in the mines, returned to their own homes.
 Ρroudly and joyously they went through every city, full οf unspeakable speakable mirth anda boldness that cannot even be expressedin words.
 Tea, thronging crowds of men κατὰ μέσας λεωφόρους καὶ ἀγορὰς ᾠδαῖς καὶ ψαλμοῖς τὸν θεὸν ἀνυμνοῦντα τὰ τῆς πορείας ἤνυεν, καὶ τοὺς μετὰ τιμωρίας ἀπηνεατάτης μικρῷ πρόσθεν δεσμίους τῶν πατρίδων ἀπεληλαμένους εἶδες ἂν ἱλαροῖς καὶ γεγηθόσι προσώποις τὰς αὐτῶν ἑστίας ἀπολαμβάνοντας, ὡς καὶ τοὺς πρότερον καθ’ ἡμῶν φονῶντας τὸ θαῦμα παρὰ πᾶσαν ὁρῶντας ἐλπίδα, συγχαίρειν τοῖς γεγενη μενοις.
 ΙΙ.
 Ταῦτα δ᾿ οὐκέθ᾿ οἷός τε φέρειν ὁ τύραννος μιαόκαλος καὶ πάντων ἀγαθῶν ἐπίβουλος ὑπάρχων, ὃν ἔφαμεν τῶν ἐπ’ ἀνατολῆς ἄρχειν μερῶν, οὐδ᾿ ὅλους ἐπὶ μῆνας ἓξ τοῦτον ἐπιτελεῖαθαι τὸν τρόπον ἠνέσχετο.
 ὅσα δ᾿ οὖν πρὸς ἁωατροπὴν ῥοπὴν τῆς εἰρήνης μηχανώμενος πρῶτον μὲν εἴργειν ἡμᾶς τῆς ἐν τοῖς κοιμητηρίοις συνόδου διὰ προφάσεως πειρᾶται, εἶτα διά τινων πονηρῶν ἀνδρῶν αὐτὸς ἑαυτῷ καθ’ ἡμῶν πρεσβεύεται, τοὺς Ἀντιοχέων πολίτας παρορμήσας ἐπὶ τὸ μηδαμῶς τινα Χριστιανῶν τὴν αὐτῶν οἰκεῖν ἐπιτρέπεαθαι πατρίδα ὡς ἐν μεγίστῃ δωρεᾷ παρ’ αὐτοῦ τυχεῖν ἀξιῶσαι, καὶ ἑτέρους δὲ ταὐτὸν ὑποβαλεῖν διαπράξααθαι·
 ὧν πάντων ἀρχηγὸς ἐπ’ αὐτῆς Ἀντιοχείας ἐπιφύεται Θεότεκνος, δεινὸς καὶ γόης καὶ πονηρὸς ἀνὴρ καὶ τῆς προσωνυμίας ἀλλότριος·
 ἐδόκει δὲ λογιστεύειν τὰ κατὰ τὴν πόλιν.
 ΙΙΙ.
 Πλεῖατα δ᾿ οὖν οὗτος καθ’ ἡμῶν στρατευσάμενος καὶ πάντα τρόπον τοὺς ἡμετέρους ὥσπερ τινὰς φῶρας ἀνοσίους ἐκ μυχῶν θηρεῦσαι διὰ σπουδῆς πεποιημένος πάντα τε ἐπὶ διαβολῇ went οn their journey, praising God in the midst of thoroughfares and market- places with songs and psalms;
 and you might see those who shortly before had been prisoners undergoing the harshest punishment and driven from their native lands, now regaining with gay and joyful countenanees their own hearths so that even those who fonherly were thirsting for our blood, seeing the wondrous thing contraryto all expectation, rejoiced with us at what had happened.
 II.
 This the tyrant could no longer endure, hater as he was of that whichis good, and plotter against every virtuous man( he wasthe ruler,as we said, of the eastern parts);
 nor did he suffer matters thus to be carried on for six entire months.
 Sumerous, therefore, were his derivlees to overturn the peaee:
 at first he attempted on some pretext to shut us out from assembling in the cemeteries,2 then through the mediumof certain evil men he sent embassies to himself against us, having urged the citizens of Antioch to ask that they might obtain from him, as avery great boon, that he shouldin no wise permitany οf the Christianstoinhabit their land, and tocontrive that others should make the same suggestion.
 The originator of all this sprang up at Antioch itself in the personof Theotecnus,a clever cheatandan evil man, and quite unlikehis name.
 3 Ηe was accounted to hold the post of curator4 in the city.
 III.
 This man, then, many times took the field against us;
 and, having been at pains by every method to hunt our people out of hiding- plaeeS as if theywere unholy thieves, having employed every καὶ κατηγορίᾳ τῆ καθ’ ἡμῶν με μηχανὴ μένος μεμηχανημένος, θανάτου δὲ αἴτιος μυρίοις ὅσοις γεγονώς, τελευτῶν εἴδωλόν τι Δῖός Φιλίου μαγγανείαις τισὶν καὶ γοητείαις ἱδρύεται, τελετάς τε ἀνάγνους αὐτῷ καὶ μυήσεις ἀκαλλιερήτους ἐξαγίστους τε καθαρμοὺς ἐπινοήσας, μέχρι καὶ βασιλέως τὴν τερατείαν δι’ ὧν ἐδόκει χρησμῶν ἐπεδείκνυτο.
 καὶ δὴ καὶ οὗτος κολακείᾳ τῇ καθ’ ἡδονὴν τοῦ κρατοῦντος ἐπεγείρει κατὰ Χριστιανῶν τὸν δαίμονα καὶ τὸν θεὸν δὴ κελεῦσαί φησιν ὑπερορίους τῆς πόλεως καὶ τῶν ἀμφὶ τὴν πόλιν ἀγρῶν ὡς ἂν ἐχθροὺς αὐτῷ χριστιανοὺς ἀπελάσαι.
 IV.
 Τούτῳ δὲ πρώτῳ κατὰ γνώμην πράξαντι πάντες οἱ λοιποὶ τῶν ἐν τέλει τὰς ὑπὸ τὴν αὐτὴν ἀρχὴν πόλεις οἰκοῦντες τὴν ὁμοίαν ὁρμῶνται ψῆφον ποιήσασθαι, προσφιλὲς εἶναι τοῦτο βασιλεῖ τῶν κατ’ ἐπαρχίαν ἡγεμόνων συνεωρακότων καὶ τοῦτ’ αὐτὸ διαπράξασθαι τοῖς ὑπηκόοις ὑποβεβληκότων·
 ὧν δὴ καὶ αὐτῶν τοῖς ψηφίσμασιν δι’ ἀντιγραφῆς ἀσμενέστατα ἐπινεύσαντος τοῦ τυράννου, αὖθις ἐξ ὑπαρχῆς ὁ καθ’ ἡμῶν ἀνεφλέγετο διωγμός.
 Ἱερεῖς δῆτα κατὰ πόλιν τῶν ξοάνων καὶ ἐπὶ τούτοις ἀρχιερεῖς πρὸς αὐτοῦ Μαξιμίνου οἱ μάλιστα ταῖς πολιτείαις διαπρέψαντες καὶ διὰ πασῶν ἔνδοξοι γενόμενοι καθίσταντο, οἷς καὶ πολλή τις εἰσήγετο σπουδὴ περὶ τὴν τῶν θεραπευομένων πρὸς αὐτῶν θρῃσκείαν.
 ἡ γοῦν ἔκτοπος τοῦ κρατοῦντος δεισιδαιμονία, συνελόντι φάναι, πάντας τοὺς ὑπ’ αὐτὸν ἄρχοντάς τε καὶ ἀρχομένους εἰς device to slanderand accuSe uS, having been the cause even of death tocountless numbers,he ended by erecting a statue of Zeus the Befriender with certain juggleries and soreeries, and having devised unhallowed rites for it and ill- omened initiations abominable purifications, 1 he exhibited his wonderworking by what oraeles he pleased, even in the Emperor's presence.
 Αnd moreover this fellow, in order to flatter and please himwho was ruling, stirred upthe demon against the Christians, and saidthat the god, forsooth,had given orders that the Christians should be driven away beyond the borderS of the city and country round about, since they were his enemies.
 IV.
 This man was the first to act thusof set purpose, and all the other offieials who lived in the cities under the same rule hastened to makea like decision, the provincial governors having seen ata glance that it was pleasingto the Emperor, and having suggested to their subjects to do the very same thing.
 Αnd when the tyrant had given a most willing assent to their petitions 2 by a reseript, onee more the persecution against us was rekindled.
 Marimin himself appointed as priests of the images in each city and, moreover,as high priests, those who were especially distinguished in the public services and had made their mark in the entire course thereof.
 These persons brought great zeal to bear on the worship of the gods whom they served.
 Certainly, the outlandish superstition of the ruler was inducing,ina word,all under him, both governors and governed, τὴν αὐτοῦ χάριν πάντα πράττειν καθ’ ἡμῶν ἐνῆγεν, ταύτην αὐτῷ χάριν μεγίστην ἀνθ’ ὧν ἐνόμιζον πρὸς αὐτοῦ τεύξεσθαι εὐεργεσιῶν, ἀντιδωρουμένων, τὸ καθ’ ἡμῶν φονᾶν καί τινας εἰς ἡμᾶς καινοτέρας κακοηθείας ἐνδείκνυσθαι.
 V.
 Πλασάμενοι δῆτα Πιλάτου καὶ τοῦ σωτῆρος ἡμῶν ὑπομνήματα πάσης ἔμπλεα κατὰ τοῦ Χριστοῦ βλασφημίας, γνώμη τοῦ μείζονος ἐπὶ πᾶσαν διαπέμπονται τὴν ὑπ’ αὐτὸν ἀρχὴν διὰ προγραμμάτων παρακελευόμενοι κατὰ πάντα τόπον, ἀγρούς τε καὶ πόλεις, ἐν ἐκφανεῖ ταῦτα τοῖς πᾶσιν ἐκθεῖναι τοῖς τε παισὶ τοὺς γραμματοδιδασκάλους ἀντὶ μαθημάτων ταῦτα μελετᾶν καὶ διὰ μνήμης κατέχειν παραδιδόναι.
 Ὧν τοῦτον ἐπιτελουμένων τὸν τρόπον, ἕτερος στρατοπεδάρχης, ὃν δοῦκα Ῥωμαῖοι προσαγορεύουσιν, ἀνὰ ἀνὰ τὴν Δαμασκὸν τῆς Φοινίκης ἐπίρρητά τινα γυναικάρια ἐξ ἀγορᾶς ἀνάρπαστα ποιήσας, βασάνους αὐταῖς αὐταῖς ἠπείλει, λέγειν ἐγγράφως ἐπαναγκάζων, ὡς δὴ εἴησάν ποτε Χριστιαναὶ συνειδεῖέν τε αὐτοῖς ἀθεμιτουργίας ἐν αὐτοῖς τε τοῖς κυριακοῖς πράττειν αὐτοὺς τὰ ἀκόλαστα καὶ ὅσα ἄλλα λέγειν αὐτὰς ἐπὶ διαβολῇ τοῦ δόγματος ἤθελεν·
 ὧν καὶ οὗτος ἐν ὑπομνήμασιν τὰς φωνὰς ἐντεθείσας βασιλεῖ κοινοῦται, καὶ δὴ προστάξαντος εἰς πάντα τόπον καὶ πόλιν καὶ ταῦτα δημοσιοῦται τὰ γράμματα.
 VI.
 ἀλλ’ ὃ μὲν οὐκ εἰς μακρὸν αὐτόχειρ ἑαυτοῦ γεγονὼς ὁ στρατάρχης δίκην τίννυσιν τῆς κακοτροπίας.
 Ημῶν δ’ αὖ φυγαὶ πάλιν ἀνεκινοῦντο καὶ διωγμοὶ χαλεποὶ τῶν τε κατὰ πάσας ἐπαρχίας to do everything against us in order to secure his favour;
 in return forthe benents which they thought to secure from him, they bestowed upon him this greatest of boons, namely,to thirst for our blood and to display some more novel tokens of malice toward us.
 V.
 Having forged, to be sure, Memoirs of Pilate and our Saviour, full of every kind of blasphemy against Christ, with the approval of their chief they sent them round to every part οf his dominions, with edicts that they should be exhibited openly for everyone to seein every plaee,both town country, and that the primary teachers should give them to the children, instead οf lessons,for study and committal to memory.
 While this was thus being carried οut, another person,a commander,whom the Romans style dux, 1 caused certain infamous women to be abducted from the market- place at Damascus in Phoenicia, and,by continually threatening them with the infliction of tortures, compelled themto state in writing that they were once actually Christians, and privyto their unhallowed deeds, and that the Christians practised in the very churches lewdness and everything else that he wished these women to say in defamation of our faith.
 Ηe also madea memorandum of their wordsand communicated ittothe Emperor,and moreover at his commandpublished this docmnent also in every place and city.
 VI.
 But not long afterwards he, that isto say, the commander, died byhis own hand, and thus paid the penaltyfor his wickedness.
 But as for us, banishments and severe persecutionswere again renewed, and the rulers in every province ἡγουμένων αὖθις δειναὶ καθ’ ἡμῶν ἐπαναστάσεις, ὡς καί τινας ἁλόντας τῶν περὶ τὸν θεῖον λόγον ἐπιφανῶν ἀπαραίτητον τὴν ἐπὶ θανάτῳ ψῆφον καταδέξασθαι.
 Ὧν τρεῖς ἐν Ἐμίσῃ πόλει τῆς Φοινίκης Χριστιανοὺς σφᾶς ὁμολογήσαντες, θηρίων βορᾷ παραδίδονται·
 ἐπίσκοπος ἢν ἐν τούτοις Σιλβανός, ἡλικίαν ὑπέργηρως, ἐν ὅλοις ἔτεσιν τεσσαράκοντα τὴν λειτουργίαν διηνυκώς.
 κατὰ δὲ τὸν αὐτὸν χρόνον καὶ Πέτρος τῶν κατ’ Ἀλεξάνδρειαν παροικιῶν προστὰς ἐπιφανέστατα, θεῖον ἐπισκόπων χρῆμα βίου τε ἀρετῆς ἕνεκα καὶ τῆς τῶν ἱερῶν λόγων συνασκήσεως, ἐξ οὐδεμιᾶς ἀνάρπαστος γεγονὼς αἰτίας, μηδεμιᾶς προλαβούσης ἀνάρπαστος ἀθρόως οὕτως καὶ ἀλόγως, ὡς ἂν Μαξιμίνου προστάξαντος, τὴν κεφαλὴν ἀποτέμνεται, σὺν αὐτῷ δὲ καὶ τῶν κατ’ Αἴγυπτον ἐπισκόπων ἄλλοι πλείους ταὐτὸν ὑπομένουσιν.
 Λουκιανός τε, ἀνὴρ τὰ πάντα ἄριστος βίῳ τε ἐγκρατεῖ καὶ τοῖς ἱεροῖς μαθήμασιν συγκεκροτημένος, τῆς κατὰ Ἀντιόχειαν παροικίας πρεσβύτερος, ἀχθεὶς ἐπὶ τῆς Νικομηδέων πόλεως, ἔνθα τηνικαῦτα βασιλεὺς διατρίβων ἐτύγχανεν, παρασχών τε ἐπὶ τοῦ ἄρχοντος τὴν ὑπὲρ ἦς προΐστατο διδασκαλίας ἀπολογίαν, δεσμωτηρίῳ παραδοθεὶς κτίννυται.
 Τοσαῦτα δῆτα ἐν βραχεῖ τῷ μισοκάλῳ Μαξιμίνῳ καθ’ ἡμῶν συνεσκεύαστο, ὡς τοῦ προτέρου δοκεῖν πολλῷ χαλεπώτερον τοῦτον ἡμῖν ἐπεγηγέρθαι διωγμόν.
 VII.
 Ἀνὰ μέσας γέ τοι τὰς πόλεις, ὃ μηδὲ ἄλλοτέ ποτε, ψηφίσματα πόλεων καθ’ ἡμῶν καὶ βασιλικῶν πρὸς ταῦτα διατάξεων ἀντιγραφαὶ once more rose up cruelly against us, with the result that some of those eminent in the divine Word were taken, and received the sentence of death without mercy.
 Of these, three in Emesa,a city of Phoenicia, were consigned to wild beasts as food, having declared themselves Christians.
 Among them was a bishop, Silvanus,exceedingly advanced in age, who had exercised his ministry for forty entire years.
 Αt the same time Ρeter also, who presided with the greatest distinction over the communities at Alexandria—a truly divine example of a bishop on accountofhis virtuous life and his earnest study of the holy Scriptures— was seized for no reason at all quite unexpectedly;
 and then immediately and unaccountably beheaded, as ifby the command of Maximin.
 Αnd along with him many others οf the Egyptian bishops endured the same penalty.
 Lucian, a most excellent man in every respect, οf temperate life and well versed in sacred learning,a presbyter of the community at Antioch, was brought to the city or Nicomedia, wheretheEmperor was then staying;
 and, having made his defence before the ruler on behalf οf the doctrine which he professed, he was committed to prison and put to death.
 so mightily, indeed,did that hater of the good, Maximin, contrive against us ina short space, that this persecution whichhehad stirred up seemed to us much more severe than the former one.
 VII.
 In fact, in the midst of the cities—a thing that never happened before— petitions presentedusby cities,and rescripts containing imperial ordinances στήλαις ἐντετυπωμένα χαλκαῖς ἀνωρθοῦντο, οἵ τε παῖδες ἀνὰ τὰ διδασκαλεῖα Ἰησοῦν καὶ Πιλάτον καὶ τὰ ἐφ’ ὕβρει πλασθέντα ὑπομνήματα διὰ στόματος κατὰ πᾶσαν ἔφερον ἡμέραν.
 Ἐνταῦθά μοι ἀναγκαῖον εἶναι φαίνεται αὐτὴν δὴ ταύτην τὴν ἐν στήλαις ἀνατεθεῖσαν τοῦ Μαξιμίνου γραφὴν ἐντάξαι, ἵν᾿ ὁμοῦ τῆς τε τοῦ θεομισείας ἡ ἀλαζὼν καὶ ὑπερήφανος αὐθάδεια φανερὰ κατασταίη καὶ τῆς παρὰ πόδας αὐτὸν μετελθούσης ἱερᾶς δίκης ἡ ἄυπνος κατὰ τῶν ἀσεβῶν μιδοπονηρία, πρὸς ἦς ἐλαθεὶς οὐκ εἰς μακρὸν τἀναντία περὶ ἡμῶν ἐβουλεύσατό τε καὶ δι’ ἐγγράφων νόμων ἐδογμάτισεν.
 ΑΝΤΙΓΡΑΦΟΝ ΕΡΜΗΝΕΙΑΣ ΤΗΕ ΜΑΞΙΜΙΝΟΥ ΠΡΟΣ ΤΑ ΚΑΘ᾿ ΗΜΩΝ ΨΗΦΙΣΜΑΤΑ ΑΝΤΙΓΡΑΦΗΣ ΑΠΟ ΕΝ ΤΥΡΩΙ ΣΤΗΛΗΣ ΜΕΤΑΛΗΦΘΕΙΣΗΣ“ Ἤδη ποτὲ ἡ ἀσθενὴς θρασύτης τῆς ἀνθρωπίνησ διανοίας ἴσχυσεν πᾶσαν πλάνης ἀμαυρότητα καὶ ὁμίχλην ἀποσεισαμένη καὶ ἀνασκεδάσασα, ἥτις πρὸ τούτου οὐ τοσοῦτον τῶν ἀσεβῶν ὅσον τῶν ἀθλίων ἀνθρώπων τὰς αἰσθήσεις ὀλεθρίῳ ἀγνοίας σκότῳ ἐνειληθείσς ἐπολιόρκει, ἐπιγνῶναι ὡς τῆ τῶν ἀθανάτων θεῶν φιλαγάθῳ προνοίᾳ διοικεῖται καὶ σταθεροποιεῖται·
 ὅπερ πρᾶγμα ἄπιστόν ἐστιν εἰπεῖν ὄπως κεχαρισμένον ὅπως τε ἥδιστον καὶ προσφιλὲς ἡμῖν γέγονεν ὡς μέγιστον δεῖγμα τῆς θεοφιλοῦς ὑμῶν προαιρέσεως δεδωκέναι, ὁπότε καὶ πρὸ τούτου οὐδενὶ ἄγνωστον ἦν ὁποίας παρατηρήσεως καὶ θεοσεβείας πρὸς τοὺς ἀθανάτους θεοὺς ἐτυγχάνετε ὄντες, οἷς οὐ φιλῶν καὶin reply,were set up,engraved on brazen tablets;
 while the children in the schools had every day on their lips the names of Jesus and Pilate and the Memoirs forged to insult us.
 Αt this pointI think it necessary to insert this same doeument of Maximin that was set up on tablets, so as to make manifest at once the boastful, overweening arrogance of this hater of God, and the divine Justice that followed close upon his heels with its sleepless hatred of the evil in wicked men.
 Ιt was this which smote him;
 and not long afterwards he reversed his policy with regard to us, and madea decree by laws in writing.
 Copy of a Translation of the RescriptofMaximin in answertoPetitions against us, taken fromthe Tablet at Tyre.
“ Νow at length, the feeble boldnessofthe human mind has shaken off and dispersed all blindingmistsof error, that error which hitherto was attacking the senses of men not so much wicked as wretched, and was wrapping them in the baneful darkness of ignorance;
 and it has been enabled to recognize that it is governedand established by the benevolentprovidenceof the immortal gods.
 Ιt passes belief to say how grateful, how exceeding pleasant and agreeable, it has proved to us that you have givena very great proofof your godly disposition;
 since even before this none could be ignorant what regard and piety you were displaying towards the immortal gods, in ὑποκένων ῥημάτων πίστις, ἀλλὰ συνεχὴς1 καὶ παράδοξος2 ἔργων ἐπισήμων γνωρίζεται.
 διόπερ ἐπαξίως ἡ ὑμετέρα πόλις θεῶν ἀθανάτων φόβον 3 ἵδρυμά καὶ οἰκητήριον ἐπικαλοῖτο·
 πολλοῖς γοῦν παραδείγμασιν καταφαίνεται τῆ τῶν οὐρανίων θεῶν αὐτὴν ἐπιδημίᾳ ἀνθεῖν.
 ἰδοὺ τοίνυν ἡ ὑμετέρα πόλις πάντων τῶν ἰδίᾳ διαφερόντων αὐτῆς ἀμελήσασα καὶ τὰς πρότερον τῶν ὑπὲρ αὐτῆς πραγμάτων δεήσεις παριδοῦσα, ὅτε πάλιν ᾔσθετο τοὺς τῆς ἐπαράτου ματαιότητος γεγονότας ἕρπειν ἄρχεσθαι καὶ ὥσπερ ἀμεληθεῖσαν καὶ κεκοιμημένην πυρὰν ἀναζωπυρουμένων τῶν πυρσῶν μεγίστας πυρκαϊὰς ἀναπληροῦσαν, εὐθέως πρὸς τὴν ἡμετέραν εὐσέβειαν, ὥσπερ πρὸς μητρόπολιν πασῶν θεοσεβειῶν, χωρίς τινος μελλήσεως κατέφυγεν, ἴασίν τινα καὶ βοήθειαν ἀπαιτοῦσα·
 ἥντινα διάνοιαν σωτηριώδη διὰ τὴν πίστιν τῆς ὑμετέρας θεοσεβείας τοὺς θεοὺς ὑμῖν ἐμβεβληκέναι δῆλόν ἐστιν.
 ἐκεῖνος τοιγαροῦν, ἐκεῖνος ὁ ὕφιστος καὶ μέγιστος Ζεύς, ὁ προκαθήμενος τῆς λαμπροτάτης ὑμῶν πόλεως, ὁ τοὺς πατρῴους ὑμῶν θεοὺς καὶ γυναῖκας καὶ τέκνα καὶ ἐστίαν καὶ οἴκους ἀπὸ πάσης ὀλεθρίου φθορᾶς ῥυόμενος, ταῖς ὑμετέραις ψυχαῖς τὸ σωτήριον ἐνέπνευσεν βούλημα, ἐπιδεικνὺς καὶ ἐμφαίνων ὅπως ἐξαίρετόν ἐστιν καὶ λαμπρὸν καὶ σωτηριῶδες μετὰ τοῦ ὀφειλομένου σεβάσματος τῆ θρῃσκείᾳ καὶ ταῖς ἱεροθῃσκείαις τῶν ἀθανάτων θεῶν προσιέναι.
 τίς γὰρ οὕτως ἀνόητος ἢ νοῦ παντὸς ἀλλότριος εὑρεθῆναι δύναται, ὃς οὐκ αἴσθεται τῆ φιλαγάθῳ τῶν θεῶν σπουδῇ συμβαίνειν μήτε τὴν γῆν τὰ παραδιδόμενα αὐτῇ σπέρματα whom is manifesteda faith, not of bareand empty words, but constant and admirable in its noble deeds.
 Wherefore your city might worthily be calledatemple and— place οfthe immortal gods.
 Certainly, by many signs it appears that it flourishes bccause there the immortal gods sojourn.
 Behold therefore, your city put away all thought for its own private advantage and neglected former requests for its own affairs, when once again it perceived that the followers οf that accursed folly were beginning to spread, as a neglected and smouldering pyre which, when its fires are rekindled into flame, forms οnce morea mighty conflagration.
 Then immediately and without any delay it had recourse to our piety, as toa metropolis ofallreligious feeling, requesting some healing and help.
 It is evident that the gods have placed in your heart this saving thought οn account οf your frialth and godly fear.
 Accordingly it was he, the most exalted and mighty, even Zeus, he who presides οver your far- famed city, he who protects your ancestral gods and women and children and hearth and home from all destruction, who inspired your hearts with this saving purpose;
 it was he who plainly showed how excellent and splendid and saving a thing it is to draw night to the worship and sacred rites οf the immortal gods with due reverence.
 For who can be found so senseless or bereft of all intelligence as not to perceive that it is by the benevolent care of the gods that the earth does not refuse the seeds committedto it,and thus disappointthe hus- ἀρνεῖσθαι τὴν τῶν γεωργῶν ἐλπίδα κενῇ προσδοκίᾳ σφάλλουσαν, μηδ’ αὖ ἀσεβοῦς πολέμου πρόσοφιν ἀνεπικωλύτως ἐπὶ γῆς στηρίζεσθαι καὶ φθαρείσης τῆς τοῦ οὐρανοῦ εὐκρασίας αὐχμῶντα τὰ σώματα πρὸς θάνατον κατασύρεσθαι, μηδὲ μὴν ἀμέτρων ἀνέμων πνεύμασι τὴν θάλασσαν κυμαίνουσαν κορυφοῦσθαι, μηδέ γε καταιγίδας ἀπροσδοκήτους καταρρηγνυμένας ὀλέθριον χειμῶνα ἐπεγείρειν, ἔτι τοίνυν μηδὲ τὴν τροφὸν ἁπάντων καὶ μητέρα γῆν ἀπὸ τῶν κατωτάτω λαγόνων ἑαυτῆς ἐν φοβερῷ τρόμῳ καταδυομένην μηδέ γε τὰ ἐπικείμενα ὄρη χασμάτων γινομένων καταλύεσθαι, ἅπερ πάντα καὶ τούτων ἔτι πολλῷ χαλεπώτερα κατὰ πρὸ τούτου πολλάκις γεγονέναι οὐδεὶς ἀγνοεῖ.
 καὶ ταῦτα σύμπαντα διὰ τὴν ὀλέθριον πλάνην τῆς ὑποκένου ματαιότητος τῶν ἀθεμίτων ἐκείνων ἀνθρώπων ἐγίνετο, ἡνίκα κατὰ τὰς ψυχὰς αὐτῶν ἐπεπόλαζεν καὶ σχεδὸν εἰπεῖν τὰ πανταχοῦ τῆς οἰκουμένης αἰσχύναις ἐπίεζεν.
 τούτοις μεθ’ ἕτερα ἐπιλέγει·
 “ ἐφοράτωσαν ἐν τοῖς πλατέσιν ἤδη πεδίοις ἀνθοῦντα τὰ λήια καὶ τοῖς ἀστάχυσιν ἐπικυμαίνοντα καὶ τοὺς λειμῶνας δι’ εὐομβρίαν φυαῖς καὶ ἄνθεσιν λαμπομένους καὶ τὴν τοῦ ἀέρος κατάστασιν εὔκρατόν τε καὶ πραοτάτην ἀποδοθεῖσαν, χαιρέτωσαν λοιπὸν ἅπαντες διὰ τῆς ἡμετέρας εὐσεβείας ἱερουργίας τε καὶ τιμῆς τῆς τοῦ δυνατωτάτου καὶ στερροτάτου ἀέρος ἐξευμενισθείης1 καὶ διὰ τοῦτο τῆς εὐδινοτάτης εἰρήνης βεβαίως μεθ’ ἡσυχίας ἀπολαύοντες ἡδυνέσθωσαν.
 καὶ ὅσοι τῆς τυφλῆς ἐκείνης πλάνης καὶ περιόδου παντάπασιν ὠφεληθέντες εἰς ὀρθὴν καὶ καλλίστην διάνοιαν ἐπανῆλθον, μειζόνως μὲν bandmen οf their hope with vain expectation? Or, again, that the spectreof unholy war does not plant itself without opposition upon the earth, so that squalid bodies are dragged off to death, while the wholesome air of heaven is polluted?Οr, indeed, that the sea does not toss andswellunder the blastsofimmoderate winds? Or that hurricanesdonot burst without warning and stir up a death- dealing tempest? Or, still further, that the earth, the nurse and mother of all, does not sink from its deepest hollows with fearful tremor, and the mountains that lie upon it crash into the resulting chasms? For all these evils, and evils even more terrible, have happened manya time before this, as everyone knows.
 Αnd all these things happened at once because of the baneful error and vain folly those unhahoVed men, when that error took possessionof theirsouls, and, οne might almost say, oppressed the whole world everywhere with its deeds of shame.
" After other remarks he adds:
“ Let them beholdin the broad plainsthe crops already ripe with waving ears of corn, the meadows, thanks to opportune rains, brilliant with plants and flowers, and the weather that has been granted us temperate and very mild;
 further, let allrejoice since throughour piety, through the sacrifices and venerationwe have rendered, the most powerful and intractable air has been propitiated, and Ιet them take pleasure in that they therefore enjoy the most serene peace securely and in quiet.
 Αnd let as many as have been wholly rescued from that blind folly and error and returned toa right and goodly frame of mind rejoice indeed the οὗν χαιρέτωσαν ὡς ἂν ἐκ χειμῶνος ἀπροσδοκήτου ἢ νόσου βαρείας ἀποσπασθέντες καὶ ἡδεῖαν εἰς τοὐπιὸν ζωῆς ἀπόλαυσιν καρπωσάμενοι·
 εἰ δὲ τῇ ἐπαράτῳ αὐτῶν ματαιότητι ἐπιμένοιεν, πολλῷ πόρρωθεν τῆς ὑμετέρας πόλεως καὶ περιχώρου, καθὼς ἠξιώσατε, ἀποχωρισθέντες ἐξελαθήτωσαν, ἵν᾿ οὕτως κατ’ ἀκολουθίαν τῆς ἀξιεπαίνου περὶ τοῦτο σπουδῆς παντὸς μιάσματος καὶ ἀσεβείας ἀποχωρισθεῖσα ἡ ὑμετέρα πόλις καὶ τὴν ἔμφυτον αὐτῇ πρόθεσιν μετὰ τοῦ ὀφειλομένου σεβάσματος ταῖς τῶν ἀθανάτων θεῶν ἱερουργίαις ὑπακούοι.
 Ἵνα δὲ εἰδῆτε ὅσῳ προσφιλὴς ἡμῖν γέγονεν ἢ περὶ τούτου ἀξίωσις ὑμῶν, καὶ χωρὶς ψηφισμάτων καὶ χωρὶς δεήσεως αὐθαιρέτῳ βουλήσει ἡ ἡμετέρα προθυμοτάτη φιλαγαθίας ψυχή, ἐπιτρέπομεν τῆ ὑμετέρᾳ καθοσιώσει ὁποίαν δ’ ἂν βουληθῆτε μεγαλοδωρεὰν ἀντὶ ταύτης ὑμῶν τῆς φιλοθέου προθέσεως αἰτῆσαι.
 καὶ ἤδη μὲν τοῦτο ποιεῖν καὶ λαβεῖν ἀξιώσατε·
 τεύξεσθε γὰρ αὐτῆς χωρίς τινος ὑπερθέσεως·
 ἥτις παρασχεθεῖσα τῆ ὑμετέρᾳ πόλει εἰς ἅπαντα τὸν αἰῶνα τῆς περὶ τοὺς ἀθανάτους θεοὺς φιλοθέου εὐσεβείας παρέξει μαρτυρίαν, τοῦ δὲ ὑμᾶς ἀξίων ἐπάθλων τετυχηκέναι παρὰ τῆς ἡμετέρας φιλαγαθίας ταύτης ὑμῶν ἕνεκεν τῆς τοῦ βίου προαιρέσεως υἱοῖς τε καὶ ἐκγόνοις ὑμετέροις ἐπιδειχθήσεται.
” Ταῦτα δὴ καθ’ ἡμῶν κατὰ πᾶσαν ἐπαρχίαν ἀνεστηλίτευτο, πάσης ἐλπίδος, τὸ γοῦν ἐπ’ ἀνθρώποις, ἀγαθῆς τὰ καθ’ ἡμᾶς ἀποκλείοντα·
 ὡς κατ’ αὐτὸ δὴ τὸ θεῖον ἐκεῖνο λόγιον, εἰ δυνατόν, ἐπὶ more, as ifthey were delievered from an unexpected hurricane or severe illness and were reaping life's sweet enjoymentfor the future.
 But if they persist intheir accursed folly, let them be separated and driven far away from your cityand neighbourhood, even as you requested;
 that so,in accordance with your praiseworthy zealin this respect, your city may be separated from all pollution and impiety, and, following its natural desire, may respond with due reverenee to the worship of the immortal gods.
“ Αnd thatyoumay know how pleasingthis your requesthasbeen to us,andhow fully disposedto benevolence our soul is, of its own accord apart from petitioins and entreaties :
 we permit your Devotedness to ask whatsoever bounty you wish, return for this your godly intent.
 Αnd now let it be your resolve so to doand receive.
 For you will obtain your bounty without delay, the granting of which to your city will furnisha testimony for evermore of our godly piety towards the immortal gods, and a proof to your sons and descendants that you have met with the due meed οf reward from our benevolence on account of these your principles of conduct.
" This was emblazoned against us in every province, excluding every ray οf hope from our condition, at leastasfaras human helpis concerned;
 so that,in accordance withthe divine oracle itself, if possible τούτοις καὶ τοὺς ἐκλεκτοὺς αὐτοὺς σκανδαλίζεσθαι.
 ἢδη γέ τοι σχεδὸν τῆς παρὰ τοῖς παρὰ τοῖς πλείστοις ἀποψυχούσης προσδοκίας, ἀθρόως, καθ’ ὁδὸν ἔτι τὴν πορείαν ἔν τισιν χώραις διανυόντων τῶν τὴν προκειμένην καθ’ ἡμῶν γραφὴν διακόνουμένων, ὁ τῆς ἰδίας ἐκκλησίας ὑπέρμαχος θεὸς μόνον οὐχὶ τὴν τοῦ τυράννου καθ’ ἡμῶν ἐπιστομίζων μεγαλαυχίαν, τὴν ὑπὲρ ἡμῶν οὐράνιον συμμαχίαν ἐπεδείκνυτο.
 VIII.
 Οἱ μὲν οὗν ἐξ ἔθους ὄμβροι τε καὶ ὑετοὶ χειμαδίου τῆς ὥρας ὑπαρχούσης τὴν ἐπὶ γῆς ἀνεῖχον αυνήθη φοράν, λιμὸς δ᾿ ἀδόκητος ἐπισκήπτει καὶ λοιμὸς ἐπὶ τούτῳ καί τινος ἑτέρου νοσήματος— ἕλκος δὲ ἦν φερωνύμως τοῦ πυρώδους ἕνεκεν ἄνθραξ προσαγορευόμενον— ἐπιφορά, ὃ καὶ καθ’ ὅλων μὲν ἕρπον τῶν σωμάτων σφαλεροὺς ἐνεποίει τοῖς πεπονθόσι κινδύνους, οὐ μὴν ἀλλὰ καὶ κατὰ τῶν ὀφθαλμῶν διαφερόντως ἐπὶ πλεῖστον γινόμενον μυρίους ὂσους ἄνδρας ἅμα γυναιξὶν καὶ παισὶν πηροὺς ἀπειργάζετο.
 Τούτοις προσεπανίσταται τῷ τυράννῳ ὁ πρὸς Αρμενίους πόλεμος, ἄνδρας ἐξ ἀρχαίου φίλους τε καὶ συμμάχους ῾Ρωμαίων, οὓς καὶ αὐτοὺς Χριστιανοὺς καὶ τὴν εἰς τὸ θεῖον εὐσέβειαν διὰ σπουδῆς ποιουμένους ὁ θεομισὴς εἰδώλοις θύειν καὶ δαίμοσιν ἐπαναγκάσαι πεπειραμένος, ἐχθροὺς ἀντὶ φίλων καὶ πολεμίους ἀντὶ συμμάχων κατεστήσατο.
 Ἀθρόως δὴ ταῦτα πάντα ὑφ’ ἕνα καὶ τὸν αὐτὸν συρρεύσαντα καιρόν, τῆς τοῦ τυράννου θρασύτητος τὴν κατὰ τοῦ θείου μεγαλαυχίαν διήλεγξεν, ὅτι even the elect themselves should be caused to stumble at these things.
 In truth, expectation was already almost failing in very many souls, when all at οnce, while those serving the writ set forth against us were οn their way and had not yet finished their journey in some districts, the Champion οf Ηis own Church, even God, stopping, 1 as it were, the proud boasting οf the tyrant against us, displayed Ηis heavenly aid on our behalf.
 VIII.
 The customary rains, indeed,and showers οfthethen prevailing winter season were withholding their usual downpour upon the earth, and we were visited with an unexpected famine, and on topof thisa plague andan outbreak οf another kind of disease.
 This later was an ulcer, which on account of its fiery character was called an anthrax.
 2 Spreading as it did οver the entire body it used to endanger greatly its victims;
 but it was the eyes that it marked οutfor special attack, and so it was the means of blinding numbers οf men as well as women and children.
 In addition to this, the tyranthadthe further troubleοfthe war against the Armenians, men who from ancient times had been friends and alliesof the Romans;
 but as they were Christians and exceedingly eamest in their piety towardsthe Deity, this hater of God, by attempting to compel them to sacrifice to idols and demons, made of them foesinstead οf friends, and enemies instead οf allies.
 The fact that all these things came together all at οnce, at οneandthe same time, served to refute utterly the tyrant's insolent boasting against the Deity;
 for he used to affirm insolently that, on δὴ τῆς περὶ τὰ εἴδωλα αὐτοῦ σπουδῆς καὶ τῆς καθ’ ἡμῶν ἕνεκα πολιορκίας μὴ λιμὸν μηδὲ λοιμὸν μηδὲ μὴν πόλεμον ἐπὶ τῶν αὐτοῦ συμβῆναι καιρῶν ἐθρασύνετο.
 ταῦτα δ’ οὗν ὁμοῦ καὶ κατὰ τὸ αὐτὸ ἐπελθόντα, καὶ τῆς αὐτοῦ καταστροφῆς περιειλήφει τὰ προοίμια.
 αὐτὸς μὲν οὖν περὶ τὸν πρὸς Ἀρ’.
 μενίους πόλεμον ἅμα τοῖς αὐτοῦ στρατοπέδοις κατεπονεῖτο, τοὺς δὲ λοιποὺς τῶν τὰς ὑπ’ αὐτὸν πόλεις οἰκούντων δεινῶς ὁ λιμός τε ἅμα καὶ ὁ λοιμὸς κατετρυχέτην, ὡς ἑνὸς μέτρου πυρῶν δισχιλίας καὶ πεντακοσίας Ἀττικὰς ἀντικαταλλάττεσθαι.
 μυρίοι μὲν οὖν ἐτύγχανον οἱ κατὰ πόλεις θνῇσκοντες, πλείους δὲ τούτων οἱ κατ’ ἀγρούς τε καὶ κώμας, ὡς ἤδη καὶ τὰς πάλαι τῶν ἀγροίκων πολυάνδρους ἀπογραφὰς μικροῦ δεῖν παντελῆ παθεῖν ἐξάλειψιν, ἀθρόως ἀθρόως ἁπάντων ἐνδείᾳ τροφῆς καὶ λοιμώδει νόσῳ διεφθαρμένων.
 τινὲς μὲν οὖν τὰ ἑαυτῶν φίλτατα βραχυτάτης τροφῆς τοῖς εὐπορωτέροις ἀπεμπολᾶν ἠξίουν, ἄλλοι δὲ τὰς κτήσεις κατὰ βραχὺ διαπιπράσκοντες εἰς ἐσχάτην ἐνδείας ἀπορίαν ἤλαυνον, ἤδη δέ τινες σμικρὰ χόρτου διαμασώμενοι σπαράγματα καί τινας ἀνέδην φθοροποιοὺς ἐσθίοντες πόας, τὴν τῶν σωμάτων ἕξιν λυμαινόμενοι διώλλυντο.
 καὶ γυναίων δὲ τῶν κατὰ πόλεις εὐγενίδων τινὲς εἰς ἀναίσχυντον ἀνάγκην πρὸς τῆς ἀπορίας ἐλαθεῖσαι, μεταιτεῖν ἐπὶ τῶν ἀγορῶν προεληΛύθεσαν, τῆς πάλαι ἐλευθερίου τροφῆς ὑπόδειγμα διὰ τῆς περὶ τὸ πρόσωπον αἰδοῦς καὶ τῆς ἀμφὶ τὴν περιβολὴν κοσμιότητος ὑποφαίνουσαι.
 καὶ οἳ μὲν ἀπεσκληκότες ὥσπερ εἴδωλα νεκρὰ ὧδε κἀκεῖσε ψυχορραγοῦντες ἐνσειόμενοί τε καὶ περιολισθαίνοντες ὑπ’account of his zeal for the idolsandhis attack uponus, neither famine nor pestilence nor even war took place in his time.
 These things, then, coming upon him together and at the sametime had constitutedtheprelude of his overthrow.
 He himself, therefore,was worn out along with his commanders in the Armenian war:
 while the rest of the inhabitantsofthe cities under his rule were so terribly wasted by both the famine and the pestilence, that two thousand five hundred Attic drachmas were given fora single measure of wheat.
 Countless was the number of those who were dying in the cities, and still larger οf those in the country parts and villages, with the result that the registers, which formerly contained the names of a numerous rural population, were now all but entirely wiped out;
 for one might almost say that the entire population perished all at once through lack of food and through plague.
 Some, indeed,did not hesitate to barter their dearest possessions for the scantiest supply of food with those better provided;
 others sold off their goods little by little and were driven to the last extremity of want;
 and others again injured their bodily health, and died from chewing small wisps of hay and recklessly eating certain pernicious herbs.
 Αnd as for the women, some well- born ladies in cities were driven by their wantto shameless necessity, and went forth to beg inthe market- plaees,displaying a proof of their noble upbringingin their shamefacedness and the decency of their apparel.
 Αnd some, wasted away like ghosts οf the departed, and atthelast gasp, stumbled and tottered here and there from inability ἀδυναμίας τοῦ στῆναι κατέπιπτον ἐν μέσαις τε πλατείαις πρηνεῖς ἡπλωμένοι ὀρέξαι σφίσιν μικρὸν τρύφος ἄρτου κατηντιβόλουν καὶ τὴν ψυχὴν πρὸς ἐσχάαις ἔχοντες ἀναπνοαῖς πεινῆν ἐπεβόων, πρὸς μόνην ταύτην τὴν ὀδυνηροτάτην φωνὴν εὐσθενεῖς καθιστάμενοι·
 οἵ δὲ τὴν πληθὺν τῶν αἰτούντων καταπληττόμενοι, δάοι τῶν εὐπορωτέρων ἐδόκουν εἶναι, μετὰ τὸ μυρία παρασχεῖν εἰς ἀπηνῆ λοιπὸν καὶ ἄτεγκτον ἐχώρουν διάθεσιν, τὰ αὐτὰ τοῖς αἰτοῦ·
 αἷν οὔπω οὔπω καὶ αὐτοὶ πείσεσθαι προσδοκῶντες ὥστ᾿ ἤδη κατὰ μέσας ἀγορὰς καὶ νεκρὰ καὶ γυμνὰ σώματα ἐφ’ ἡμέραις πλείοσιν ἄταφα διερριμμένα θέαν τοῖς ὁρῶσιν οἰκτροτάτην παρέχειν.
 ἤδη γέ τοι καὶ κυνῶν τινες ἐγίνοντο βορά, δι’ ἢν μάλιστα αἰτίαν οἱ ζῶντες ἐπὶ τὴν κυνοκτονίαν ἐτράποντο δέει τοῦ μὴ λυσσήσαντας ἀνθρωποφαγίαν ἐργάσασθαι.
 οὐχ ἥκιστα δὲ καὶ ὁ λοιμὸς πάντας οἴκους ἐπεβόσκετο, μάλισταδ’ οὓς ὁ λιμὸς διὰ τὸ εὐπορεῖν τροφῶν οὐχ οἷός ἢν ἑκτρῖψαι·
 οἱ γοῦν ἐν περιουσίαις, ἄρχοντες καὶ ἡγεμόνες καὶ μυρίοι τῶν ἐν τέλει, ὥσπερ ἐπίτηδες τῆ λοιμώδει νόσῳ πρὸς τοῦ λιμοῦ καταλελειμμένοι, ὀξεῖαν καὶ ὠκυτάτην ὑπέμενον τελευτήν.
 πάντα δ’ οὖν οἰμωγῶν ἦν ἀνάπλεα, κατὰ πάντας τε στενωποὺς ἀγοράς τε καὶ πλατείας οὐδ’ ἄλλο τι θεωρεῖν ἢ θρήνους μετὰ τῶν συνήθων αὐτοῖς αὐλῶν τε καὶ κτύπων.
 τοῦτον δὴ τὸν τρόπον δυσὶν ὅπλοις τοῖς προδεδηλωμένοις λοιμοῦ τε ὁμοῦ καὶ λιμοῦ στρατεύσας, ὅλας ὁ θάνατος ἐν ὀλίγῳ γενεὰς ἐνεμήθη, ὡς ὁρᾶν ἤδη δυεῖν καὶ to stand, and fell down;
 then, stretched out prone the midst of the streets they would beg fora small οrselof bread tobe handed them, and with thet breath in their body cry out that they were ungry, finding strength for this most anguished of cries alone.
 Others, such as were regarded as belonging tothe wealthier classes, amazed at the ultitudeof beggars, after giving countless doles, enceforth adopteda hard and pitiless frame of mind, since they expected that before very long they would be suffering the same misery as the beggars;
 so that inthe midst of market- places andad and naked bodies lay scattered here and there buried for many days, presenting a most piteous ectacle to those who saw them.
 Some actually came food even for dogs;
 and chiefly for this reason οse who were alive turned to killing dogs, for feart they might become mad and turn to devouring en.
 But worst οf all, the pestilence also battened on every house, especially those whom the famine uld not completely destroy because they were well provided with food.
 Men, for example, in affluent cumstances, rulers and governors and numbers of cials, who had been left, as it were of set purposey the famine for the benefitofthe plague, endured a sharp and very speedy death.
 So every placewas 11 of lamentations;
 in every alley and marketce and street there was nothing to be seen but eral dirges, together with the flutes and noises1 at accompany them.
 Thus waging war with theoresaidtwo weapons,pestilence and famine, death voured whole familes ina short time, so thatone ight actually see the bodies οf two or three dead τριῶν σώματα νεκρῶν ὑπὸ μίαν ἐκφορὰν πρὸ·
 κομιζόμενα.
 τοιαῦτα τῆς Μαξιμίνου μεγαλαυχίας καὶ τῶν κατὰ πόλεις καθ’ ἡμῶν ψηφισμάτων τὰ ἐπίχειρα ἢν, ὅτε καὶ τῆς χριστιανῶν περὶ πάντα απουδῆς τε καὶ εὐσεβείας πᾶαιν ἔθνεσιν διάδηλα κατέστη τὰ τεκμήρια.
 μόνοι γοῦν ἐν τηλικαύτη κακῶν περιστάσει τὸ συμπαθὲς καὶ φιλάνθρωπον ἔργοις αὐτοῖς ἐπιδεικνύμενοι, διὰ πάσης ἡμέρας οἳ μὲν τῆ τῶν θνῃσκόντων μυριάδεςδ’ ἦσαν οἷς οὔτις ἢν ὁ ἐπιμελησόμενος) κηδείᾳ τε καὶ ταφῇ προσεκαρτέρουν, οἳ δὲ τῶν ἀνὰ πᾶσαν τὴν πόλιν πρὸς τοῦ λιμοῦ κατατρυχομένων μένων τὴν πληθὺν ὑπὸ μίαν σύωαξιν ἀθροίζοντες ἄρτους διένεμον τοῖς πᾶσιν, ὡς περιβόητον εἰς πάντας ἀνθρώπους καταστῆναι τὸ πρᾶγμα θεόν τε τῶν Χριστιανῶν δοξάξειν εὐσεβεῖς τε καὶ μόνους θεοσεβεῖς τούτους ἀληθῶς πρὸς αὐτῶν ἐλεγχθέντας τῶν πραγμάτων ὁμολογεῖν.
 Ἐφ' οἷς τοῦτον ἐπ’ ιτελου μένοις τὸν τρόπον ὁ μέγας καὶ οὐράνιος χριστιανῶν ὑπέρμαχος θεὸς τὴν κατὰ πάντων ἀνθρώπων διὰ τῶν δεδηλωμένων ἐπιδειξάμενος ἀπειλὴν καὶ ἀγανάκτησιν ἀνθ’ ὧν εἰς ἡμᾶς ὑπερβαλλόντως ἐνεδείξαντο, τὴν εὐμενῆ καὶ φαιδρὰν τῆς αὐτοῦ περὶ ἡμᾶς προνοίας αὖθις ἡμῖν αὐγὴν ἀπεδίδου, ὡς ἐν βαθεῖ σκότῳ πάρα·
 δοξότατα φῶς ἡμῖν ἐξ αὐτοῦ καταλάμπων εἰρήνης ἐκφανές τε τοῖς πᾶσιν καθιστὰς θεὸν αὐτὸν τῶν καθ’ ἡμᾶς ἐπίσκοπον διὰ παντὸς γεγονέναι πραγμάτων, μαστίζοντα μὲν καὶ διὰ τῶν περιστάσεων κατὰ καιρὸν ἐπιστρέφοντα τὸν αὐτοῦ λαὸν πάλιντ’ αὗ μετὰ τὴν αὐτάρκη παιδείαν ἵλεω καὶ εὐμενῆ persons carried out for burial ina single funeral train.
 Such were the wages received for the proud boasting of Maximin and for the petitions presented by the cities against us;
 while the proofs of Christians' zeal and piety in every respect were manifest to all the heathen.
 For example, they alonein such anevil state of affairs gave practical evidence of their sympathy and humanity:
 all day long some of them would diligently persevere in performing the last offices for the dying and burying them( for therewerecountless numbers,and no onetolook after them);
 while others would gather together in a single assemblage the multitudeof those who all throughout the city were wasted with the famine, and distribute bread to them all, so that their action was on all men's lips, and they glorified the God of the Christians, and, convinced bythe deeds themselves, acknowledged that they ere truly pious and God- fearing.
 Αfter these things were thus accomplished, God, he greatand heavenly Champion of the Christians, hen Ηe had displayed Ηis threatening and wrath gainst all men bythe aforesaid means, in return for heir exceeding great attacks against us, once again estored to us the bright and kindly radianee of His rovidential care for us.
 Most marvellously, as in thick darkness, Ηe causedthe light of peaceto hine uponus from Himself, and madeit manifesto all that God Himself had been watching over our ffairs continually, at times scourging and in due eason correcting Ηis people by means of misfortunes, nd again on the other hand after sufficient chastisement τοῖς εἰς αὐτὸν τὰς ἐλπίδας ἔχουσιν ἀναφαινόμενον.
 ΙΧ.
 Οὕτω δῆτα Κωνσταντίνου, ὃν βασιλέα ἐκ βασιλέως εὐσεβῆ τε ἐξ εὐσεβεστάτου καὶ πάντα σωφρονεστάτου γεγονέναι προειρήκαμεν, Λικιννίου τε τοῦ μετ’ αὐτόν, συνέσει καὶ εὐσεβείᾳ τετιμημένων, πρὸς τοῦ παμβασιλέως θεοῦ τε τῶν ὅλων καὶ σωτῆρος κατὰ τῶν δυσσεβεστάτων τυράννων ἀνεγηγερμένου πολέμου τε νόμῳ παραταξαμένου, θεοῦ συμμαχοῦντος σωτῆρος δύο θεοφιλῶν κατὰ τῶν δύο δυσσεβεστάτων τυράννων ἀνεγηγερμένων πολέμου τε νόμῳ παραταξαμέων, θεοῦ συμμαχοῦντος αὐτοῖς παραδοξότατα, πίπτει μὲν ἐπὶ Ῥώμης ὑπὸ Κωνσταντῖνον Μαξέντιος, ὁ δ’ ἐπ’ ἀνατολῆς οὐ πολὺν ἐπιζήσας ἐκείνῳ χρόνον, αἰσχίστῳ καὶ αὐτὸς ὑπὸ Λικίννιον οὔπω μανέντα τότε καταστρέφει θανάτῳ.
 Πρότερός γε μὴν ὁ καὶ τιμῇ καὶ τάξει τῆς βασιλείας πρῶτος Κωνσταντῖνος τῶν ἐπὶ Ῥώμης κατατυραννουμένων μένων φειδὼ λαβών, θεὸν τὸν οὐράνιον τόν τε τούτου λόγον, αὐτὸν δὴ τὸν πάντων σωτῆρα Ἰησοῦν χριστόν, σύμμαχον δι’ εὐχῶν ἐπικαλεσάμενος, πρόεισιν πανστρατιᾷ, Ῥωμαίοις τὰ τῆς ἐκ προγόνων ἐλευθερίας προμνώμενος.
 Μαξεντίου δῆτα μᾶλλον ταῖς κατὰ γοητείαν μηχαναῖς ἢ τῆ τῶν ὑπηκόων ἐπιθαρσοῦντος εὐνοίᾳ, προελθεῖν γε μὴν οὐδ’ ὅσον πυλῶν τοῦ ἄατε ἐπιτολμῶντος, ὁπλιτῶνδ’ ἀνηρίθμῳ πλήθει καὶ στρατοπέδων λόχοις μυρίοις πάντα τόπον καὶ χώραν καὶ πόλιν, ὅση τις ἐν κύκλῳ τῆς Ῥωμαίων showing mercy and goodwill to those who fix their hopes on Ηim.
 ΙX.
 Thus in truth Constantine, who, as aforesaid,1 was Emperorandsprungfroman Emperor, pious and sprung from a most pious and in every respect most prudent father, and Licinius, who ranked next to him — both honoured for their and piety — were stirred up by the King of God of the universe and Saviour, two men beloved of God, against the two most impious tyrants;
 and when warwas formally engaged, God proved their ally2 in the mostwonderful manner,and Maxentius fell at Rome at the hands of Constantine;
 while he 3 of the Εast did not long survive him, for he too perished by a most disgraceful death at the hands of Licinius, 4 who had not yet become mad.
 4 But to resume.
 Constantine, the superior of the Emperors in rank and dignity, vas the first to take pity on those subjected to tyranny at Rome;
 and, calling in prayer upon God whoisin heaven,and His Word, even Jesus Christ the Saviour of all,as his ally, he advancedin full force, seeking to secure for the Romans their ancestral liberty.
 Maxentius, to be sure, put his trust rather in devices of magic than in the goodwill of his subjects, and in truth did not dare to advance even beyond the’s gates, but with an innumerable multitude of heavy- armed soldiers and countless bodies of legionaries secured every place and district and city that had been reduced to slavery by him in the environs of Rome and in all καὶ Ἰταλίας ἁπάαης ὑπ’ αὐτῷ δεδούλωτο, φραξαμένου, ὁ τῆς ἐκ θεοῦ αυμμαχίας ἀνημμένος βασιλεὺς ἐπιὼν πρώτη καὶ δευτέρᾳ καὶ τρίτῃ τοῦ τυράννου παρατάξει εὖ μάλα τε πάσας ἑλών, πρόεισιν ἐπὶ πλεῖστον ὅσον τῆς Ἰταλίας ἤδη τε αὐτῆς ῾Ρώμης ἄγχιστα ἦν·
 εἶθ᾿ ὡς μὴ τοῦ τυράννου χάριν ῾Ρωμαίοις πολεμεῖν ἀναγκάζοιτο, θεὸς αὐτὸς τισιν ὥσπερ τὸν τύραννον πορρωτάτω πυλῶν ἐξέλκει καὶ τὰ πάλαι δὴ κατὰ ἀαεβῶν ὡς ἐν μύθου λόγῳ παρὰ τοῖς πλείστοις ἀπιατούμενα, πιστά γε μὴν πιατοῖς ἐν ἱεραῖς βίβλοις ἐατηλιτευμένα, αὐτῇ ἐναργείᾳ πᾶσιν ἁπλῶς εἰπεῖν, πιστοῖς καὶ ἀπίατοις, ὀφθαλμοῖς τὰ παράδοξα παρειληφόαιν, ἐπιστώσατο.
 ὥαπερ γοῦν ἐπ’ αὐτοῦ Μωυσέως καὶ τοῦ πάλαι θεοσεβοῦς Ἑβραίων γένους“ ἅρματα Φαραὼ καὶ τὴν δύναμιν αὐτοῦ ἔρριψεν εἰς θάλασσαν, ἐπιλέκτους ἀναβάτας τριστάτας·
 κατεπόθηααν ἐν θαλάσσῃ.
 ἐρυθρᾷ, πόντος ἐκάλυψεν αὐτούς,” κατὰ τὰ αὐτὰ δὴ καὶ Mαξέντιος οἵ τε ἀμφ᾿ αὐτὸν ὁπλῖται καὶ δορυφόροι “ ἔδυσαν εἰς βυθὸν ὡς εἰ λίθος,” ὁπηνίκα νῶτα δοὺς τῇ ἐκ θεοῦ μετὰ Kωναταντίνου δυνάμει, τὸν πρὸ τῆς πορείας διῄει ποταμόν, ὃν αὐτὸς σκάφεσιν ζεύξας καὶ εὖ μάλα γεφυρώσας μηχανὴν ὀλέθρου καθ’ ἑαυτοῦ αυνεατήσατο·
 ἐφ’ ᾧ ἦν εἰπεῖν“ λάκκον ὤρυξεν καὶ ἀνέακαφεν αὐτόν, καὶ ἐμπεσεῖται εἰς βόθρον ὃν εἰργάσατο.
 ἐπιστρέφει ὁ πόνος αὐτοῦ εἰς κεφαλὴν αὐτοῦ, καὶ ἐπὶ κορυφὴν αὐτοῦ ἢ ἀδικία αὐτοῦ καταβήαεται.
 ” Ταύτῃ δῆτα τοῦ ἐπὶ τοῦ ποταμοῦ ζεύγματος διαλυθέντος, ὑφιζάνει μὲν ἡ διάβασις, χωρεῖ δ᾿ ἀθρόως αὔτανδρα κατὰ τοῦ βυθοῦ τὰ σκάφη, καὶ Italy.
 The Εmperor, closely relyingon the help thatcomes from God, attacked the first, second and third οf the tyrant's armies, and capturing them with ease advanced over a large part of Italy, actually coming very near to Rome itself.
 Then, that he mightnot be compelled becauseofthe tyrant tofight against Romans, God Ηimselfas if with chains dragged the tyrant far away from the gates;
 and those things which were inscribed long ago in the sacred books against wicked men— to which as myth very many gaveno faith, yet were they worthy of faith tothe faithful—now by theirvery found faith, in a word, with all, faithful and faithless, who had the miracle before their eyes.
 As, for example, in the days of Moses himself and the ancient and godly race of the Hebrews,“ Ρharaoh’s chariots and his host hathhe cast intothe sea,his chosen horsemen, even captains, they were sunk in the Red Sea, the deep covered them’’;
 in the sameway also Maxentius andthe armed soldiers and guards around him“ went down into the depths likea stone,” he turnedhis back beforethe God- sent power thatwas with Constantine, and was crossing the river that lay in his path, which he himself had bridged right well by joining of boats, and so formed into an engine οf destruction against himself.
 Wherefore one might say:
“ Ηe hath madea pit,and digged it, and shall fall into the ditch which he made.
 Ηis work shall return upon his own head, and his wickedness shall come down upon his οwn pate.
” Thus verily, through the breaking of the bridge οver the river, the passage across collapsed, and down went the boats all at once,men and all, into the deep;
 αὐτός γε πρῶτος ὁ δυσσεβέστατος, εἶτα δὲ καὶ οἱ ἀμφ’ αὐτὸν ὑπασπισταί, ᾖ τὰ θεῖα προαναφωνεῖ λόγια, ἔδυσαν ὡς εἰ μόλιβδος ἐν ὕδατι σφοδρῷ·
 ὥστε εἰκότως εἰ μὴ λόγοις ἔργοιςδ’ οὗν ὁμοίως τοῖς ἀμφὶ τὸν μέγαν θεράποντα Μωυσέα τοὺς παρὰ θεοῦ τὴν νίκην ἀραμένους αὐτὰ δὴ τὰ κατὰ τοῦ πάλαι δυσσεβοῦς τυράννου ὧδέ πως ἄν ὑμνεῖν καὶ λέγειν“ ᾄσωμεν τῷ κυρίῳ, ἐνδόξως γὰρ δεδόξασται.
 ἵππον καὶ ἀναβάτην ἔρριφεν εἰς θάλασσαν·
 βοηθὸς καὶ σκεπαστής μου κύριος, ἐγένετό μοι εἰς σωτηρίαν” καὶ“ τίς ὅμοιός ἀοῖ ἐν θεοῖς, κύριε, τίς ὅμοιός ἀοῖ;
 δεδοξασμένος ἐν ἁγίοις, θαυμαστὸς ἐν δόξαις, ποιῶν τέρατα.
 ταῦτα καὶ ὅσα τούτοις ἀδελφά τε καὶ ἐμφερῆ Κωνσταντῖνος τῷ πανηγεμόνι καὶ τῆς νίκης αἰτίῳ θεῷ αὐτοῖς ἔργοις ἀνυμνήσας, ἐπὶ Ῥώμης μετ’ ἐπινικίων εἰσήλαυνεν, πάντων ἀθρόως αὐτὸν ἅμα κομιδῆ νηπίοις καὶ γυναιξὶν τῶν τε ἀπὸ τῆς συγκλήτου βουλῆς καὶ τῶν ἄλλως διασημοτάτων σὺν παντὶ δήμῳ Ῥωμαίων φαιδροῖς ὄμμασιν αὐταῖς ψυχαῖς οἷα λυτρωτὴν σωτῆρά τε καὶ εὐεργέτην μετ’ εὐφημιῶν καὶ ἀπλήστου χαρᾶς ὑποδεχομένων·
 ὃ δ’ ὥσπερ ἔμφυτον τὴν εἰς θεὸν εὐσέβειαν κεκτημένος, μηδ’ ὅλως ἐπὶ ταῖς βοαῖς ὑποσαλευόμενος μένος μηδ’ ἐπαιρόμενος τοῖς ἐπαίνοις, εὗ μάλα τῆς ἐκ θεοῦ συνῃσθημένος βοηθείας, αὐτίκα τοῦ σωτηρίου τρόπαιον πάθους ὑπὸ χεῖρα ἰδίας εἰκόνος ἀνατεθῆναι προστάττει, καὶ δὴ τὸ σωτήριον σημεῖον ἐπὶ τῇ δεξιᾷ κατέχοντα αὐτὸν ἐν τῷ μάλιστα τῶν ἐπὶ Ῥώμης δεδημοσιευμένῳ τόπῳ στήσαντας αὐτὴν δὴ ταύτην προγραφὴν ἐντάξαι ῥήμασιν αὐτοῖς τῇ Ῥωμαίων ἐγκελεύεται φωνὴ“ τούτῳ τῷ σω- and firstofall he himself, that mostwickedof men,and then alsothe shield-bearers around him, as the divine oracles foretell, sank as lead in the mighty waters.
 So that suitably, if notinwords, at leastin deeds, like the followers of the great servant Moses, those who had won the victory by the help of God might in some sort hymn the very same words Which were uttered against the wicked tyrant οf old, and say:
“ Let us singuntothe Lord, for gloriously hath he been glorified:
 the horse and his rider hath he thrown into the sea.
 The Lord is my strengthand protector,he is become my salvation’ ’;
 and“ Who islikeunto thee,O Lord, among the gods? who is like thee,glorified in saints, marvellous in praises, doing wonders?’’ These things, and such as are akin and similar to them, Constantine by his very deeds sang to God the Ruler of all and Αuthor οf the victory;
 then he entered Rome with hymns of triumph, and all the senators and other persons οf great note, together with women and quite young children and all the Roman people, received him ina body with beaming countenances to their very heart asa ransomer,saviour and benefactor, with praises and insatiable joy.
 But he, as one possessed οf naturalpiety towards God, was by no means stirred by their shoutsnor upliftedby their praises, for wellhe knew that his help was from God;
 and straightway he gave orders thata memorial ofthe Saviour's should be setupin the hand of his own Statue;
 and indeed when they set him in the most public place in Rome holdingthe Saviour's sign in his right hand, bade them engrave this very inscription in these words in the Latin tongue:
“ By this salutary sign, τηριώδει σημείῳ, τῷ ἀληθεῖ ἐλέγχῳ τῆς ἀνδρείας τὴν πόλιν ὑμῶν ἀπὸ ζυγοῦ τοῦ τυράννου διασωθεῖσαν ἠλευθέρωσα, ἔτι μὴν καὶ τὴν σύγκλητον καὶ τὸν δῆμον Ῥωμαίων τῆ ἀρχαίᾳ ἐπιφανείᾳ καὶ λαμπρότητι ἐλευθερώσας ἀποκατέστησα.
” καὶ δὴ ἐπὶ τούτοις αὐτός τε Κωνσταντῖνος καὶ σὺν αὐτῷ βασιλεὺς Λικίννιος, οὔπω τότε ἐφ’ ἢν ὕστερον ἐκπέπτωκεν μανίαν τὴν διάνοιαν ἐκτραπείς, θεὸν τὸν τῶν ἀγαθῶν ἁπάντων αὐτοῖς αἴτιον εὐμενίσαντες, ἄμφω μιᾷ βουλῆ καὶ γνώμη νόμον ὑπὲρ χριστιανῶν τελεώτατον πληρέστατα διατυποῦνται, τυποῦνται, καὶ τῶν πεπραγμένων εἰς αὐτοὺς ἐκ θεοῦ τὰ παράδοξα τά τε τῆς κατὰ τοῦ τυράννου νίκης καὶ τὸν νόμον αὐτὸν Μαξιμίνῳ, τῶν ἐπ’ ἀνατολῆς ἐθνῶν ἔτι δυναστεύοντι φιλίαν τε πρὸς αὐτοὺς ὑποκοριζομένῳ, διαπέμπονται.
 ὃ δ’ οἷα τύραννος περιαλγὴς ἐφ’ οἷς ἔγνω, γεγενημένος, εἶτα μὴ δοκεῖν ἑτέροις εἶξαι βουλόμενος μηδ’ αὖ παρεκθέσθαι τὸ κελευσθὲν δέει τῶν προστεταχότων ὡς ἂν ἐξ ἰδίας αὐθεντίας τοῖς ὑπ’ αὐτὸν ἡγεμόσιν τοῦτο πρῶτον ὑπὲρ Χριστιανῶν ἐπάναγκες διαχαράττει χαράττει τὸ γράμμα, τὰ μηδέπω ποτὲ πρὸς αὐτοῦ πεπραγμένα ἐπιπλάστως αὐτὸς καθ’ ἑαυτοῦ ψευδόμενος.
 ΑΝΤΙΓΡΑΦΟΝ ΕΡΜΗΝΕΙΑΣ ΕΠΙΣΤΟΛΗΣ ΤΟΥ ΤΥΡΑΝΝΟΥ ΙXΑ.
 “ Ἱόβιος Μαξιμῖνος Σεβαστὸς Σαβίνῳ.
 καὶ παρὰ τῇ σῇ ατιβαρότητι καὶ παρὰ πᾶσιν ἀνθρώποις φανερὸν εἶναι πέποιθα τοὺς δεσπότας ἡμῶν Διοκλητιανὸν καὶ Μαξιμιανόν, τοὺς ἡμετέρους πατέρας, ἡνίκα συνεῖδον σχεδὸν ἅπανταςthe true proof of bravery,I saved and delivered your city from the yoke of the tyrant;
 and moreoverI freed and restoredtotheir ancient fame and splendour both the senate and the people of the Romans.
” Αnd afterthis Constantine himself, and with him the emperor Licinius,1 whose mind was not yet deranged by the madness into Which he afterwards fell,1 having propitiated God as the Αuthor of all their good fortune, both with one will and purpose drew upa most perfect law2 in the fullest terms on behalf οf the Christans3;
 and to Maximin, who was still ruler of the provinces of the East and playing at being their friend, they senton an accountofthe marvellous things that God had done for them, as well as of their victory over the tyrant, and thelaw itself.
 Αnd he, tyrant thathe was,was greatly troubled at the intelligence;
 but, not wishingto seem to yield to others, nor yettosuppress the command through fear of those whohad enjoined it, as if of his own motion he penned perforce this first letter on behalf of the Christians to the governors under him;
 in whichhebelies himself, and feigns that he had done thingshe never had.
 Copy of a Translation of the Epistleofthe Tyrant“ Jovius Μaximinus Augustus to Sabinus.
I am persuaded that itismanifest both tothyFirmness and toallmen that our mastersDiocletian and Maximian, our fathers, when they perceived that ἀνθρώπους καταλειφθείσης τῆς τῶν θεῶν θρῃσκείας τῷ ἔθνει τῶν Χριστιανῶν ἑαυτοὺς ὀρθῶς διατεταχέναι πάντας ἀνθρώπους τοὺς ἀπὸ τῆς τῶν αὐτῶν θεῶν τῶν ἀθανάτων θρῃσκείας ἀναχωρήσαντας προδήλῳ κολάσει καὶ τιμωρίᾳ εἰς τὴν θρησκείαν τῶν θεῶν ἀνακληθῆναι.
 ἀλλ’ ὅτε ἐγὼ εὐτυχῶς τὸ πρῶτον εἰς τὴν ἀνατολὴν παρεγενόμην καὶ ἔγνων εἴς τινας τόπους πλείστους τῶν ἀνθρώπων τὰ δημόσια ὠφελεῖν δυναμένους ὑπὸ τῶν δικαστῶν διὰ τὴν προειρημένην αἰτίαν ἐξορίζεσθαι, ἑκάστῳ τῶν δικαστῶν ἐντολὰς δέδωκα ὥστε μηδένα τούτων τοῦ λοιποῦ προσφέρεσθαι τοῖς ἐπαρχιώταις ἀπηνῶς, ἀλλὰ μᾶλλον κολακείᾳ καὶ προτροπαῖς πρὸς τὴν τῶν θεῶν θρῃσκείαν αὐτοὺς ἀνακαλεῖν.
 τηνικαῦτα οὖν, ὅτε ἀκολούθως τῇ κελεύσει τῆ ἐμῇ ὑπὸ τῶν δικαστῶν ἐφυλάττετο τὰ προστεταγμένα, συνέβαινεν μηδένα ἐκ τῶν τῆς ἀνατολῆς μερῶν μήτε ἐξόριστον μήτε ἐνύβριστον γίνεσθαι, ἀλλὰ μᾶλλον ἐκ τοῦ μὴ βαρέως κατ’ αὐτῶν τι γίνεσθαι εἰς τὴν τῶν θεῶν θρησκείαν ἀνακεκλῆσθαι·
 μετὰ δὲ ταῦτα, ὅτε τῷ παρελθόντι ἐνιαυτῷ εὐτυχῶς ἐπέβην εἰς τὴν Νικομήδειαν κἀκεῖ διετέλουν, παρεγένοντο πολῖται τῆς αὐτῆς πόλεως πρός με ἅμα μετὰ τῶν ξοάνων τῶν θεῶν μειζόνως δεόμενοι ἵνα παντὶ τρόπῳ τὸ τοιοῦτον ἔθνος μηδαμῶς ἐπιτρέποιτο ἐν τῆ αὐτῶν πατρίδι οἰκεῖν.
 ἀλλ’ ὅτε ἔγνων πλείστους τῆς αὐτῆς θρῃσκείας ἄνδρας ἐν αὐτοῖς τοῖς μέρεσιν οἰκεῖν, οὕτως αὐτοῖς τὰς ἀποκρίσεις ἀπένεμον ὅτι τῆ μὲν αἰτήσει αὐτῶν ἀσμένως χάριν ἔσχηκα, ἀλλ’ οὐ παρὰ πάντων τοῦτο αἰτηθὲν κατεῖδον·
 εἰ μὲν οὖν τινες εἶεν τῇ αὐτὴ δεισιδαιμονίᾳ διαμένοντες, almost all men had abandoned the worship of the gods and associated themselves with the nation of the Christians, rightly gave orders that all men who deserted the worship of their gods, gods, the the immortal gods, should be recalledtothe worship of the gods by open correction and punishment.
 But when under happy auspicesI came for the first time to the East, and learnt that in certain places very many persons who were able to serve the public good were being banished by the judges for the aforesaid reason,I gave ordersto each of the judges thatof them in future was to deal harshly with the pronincials, but rather by persuasive words and exhortations to recall them to the worship of the gods.
 It came to pass at that therefore, when when withmy injunction the judges observed what was commanded, that no oneinthe eastem provinceswas either banishedor suffered insult, but rather was recalled to the worship the gods, because no severe measures were employed against them.
 But afterwards, when last year under happy auspicesI had gone to Nicomediaandwas staying there, there came to me citizens of the same city with images of the gods, earnestly requesting that on no account should sucha nation be permittedto dwell in their city.
 But whenI learnt that very many οf the same religion dwelt in those very parts,I thus made them reply:
 ThatI was gratified, and thanked themfor their request, but I perceived that this requestdid not come from all.
 If, then, there were some that persevered inthe same superstition, let each οne οὕτως ἕνα ἕκαστον ἐν τῆ ἰδίᾳ προαιρέσει τὴν βούλησιν ἔχειν καὶ εἰ βούλοιντο, τὴν τῶν θεῶν θρησκείαν ἐπιγινώσκειν.
 ὅμως καὶ τοῖς τῆς αὐτῆς πόλεως Νικομηδεῦσιν καὶ ταῖς λοιπαῖς πόλεσιν, αἳ καὶ αὐταὶ εἰς τοσοῦτον τὴν ὁμοίαν αἴτησιν περισπουδάστως πρός με πεποιήκασιν, δηλονότι ἵνα μηδεὶς τῶν χριστιανῶν ταῖς πόλεσιν ἐνοικοίη, ἀνάγκην ἔσχον προσφιλῶς αὐτοκράτορες ὅτι αὐτὸ τοῦτο καὶ οἱ ἀρχαῖοι αὐτοκράτορες πάντες διεφύλαξαν καὶ αὐτοῖς τοῖς θεοῖς, δι’ οὓς πάντες ἄνθρωποι καὶ αὐτὴ ἡ τῶν δημοσίων διοίκησις συνίσταται, ἤρεσεν οὖν ὥστε τὴν τοσαύτην αἴτησιν, ἢν ὑπὲρ τῆς θρῃσκείας τοῦ θείου αὐτῶν ἀναφέρουσιν, βεβαιώσαιμι.
“ Τοιγαροῦν εἰ καὶ τὰ μάλιστα καὶ τῇ σῇ καθοσιώσει πρὸ τούτου τοῦ χρόνου διὰ γραμμάτων ἐπέσταλται καὶ δι’ ἐντολῶν ὁμοίως κεκέλευσται ἵνα μὴ κατὰ τῶν ἐπαρχιωτῶν τὸ τοιοῦτον ἔθος διαφυλάξαι ἐπιμεληθέντων μηδὲν τραχέως, ἀλλὰ ἀνεξικάκως καὶ συμμέτρως συμπεριφέροιντο αὐτοῖς, ὅμως ἵνα μήτε ὑπὸ τῶν βενεφικιαρίων μήτε ὑπ’ ἄλλων τῶν τυχόντων ὕβρεις μήτε σεισμοὺς ὑπομένοιεν, ἀκόλουθον ἐνόμισα καὶ τούμνῆσαι τοῖς γράμμασιν τὴν σὴν στιβαρότητα ὑπομνῆσαι ὅπως ταῖς κολακείαις καὶ ταῖς προτροπαῖς μᾶλλον τὴν τῶν θεῶν ἐπιμέλειαν τοὺς ἡμετέρους ἐπαρχιώτας ποιήσειας ἐπιγινώσκειν·
 ὅθεν εἴ τις τῇ αὐτοῦ προαιρέσει τὴν θρῃσκείαν τῶν θεῶν ἐπιγνωστέον προσλάβοι, τούτους ὑποδέχεσθαι προσήκει·
 εἰ δέ τινες τῆ ἰδίᾳ θρησκείᾳ ἀκολουθεῖν βούλοιντο, ἐν τῇ αὐτῶν ἐξουσίᾳ καταλείποις.
 keep thus his resolve according as he personally wished;
 and if theyso desired it, let them acknowledge the worship of the gods.
 Nevertheless to these same Nicomedians and the rest of the cities, who themselves have so very earnestly addressed mea similar request, namely, that no Christian shouldinhabit their cities,I was compelled to reply ina friendly manner, because the Emperors of old time had earefully obesrved this very thing, and it was plearing to the gods themselves, by whom 1 all men and the government itself of the state subsist, that2I should confirm sueh a request as they were on behalf of the worship of their Deity.
 “ Therefore, although special letters have been written to thy Devotedness before this time, and likewise it has been laid down by ordinances that no harsh measures should be adopted against provincials who have a mind to persevere in sucha custom, but that men should deal with them in a long- suffering and adaptable spirti:
 nevertheless that they may not suffer insults or extortions at the hands of the beneficiarii3 or any others whatsoever,Ι think it right by this letter also to putthy Firmness in mind that thou shouldest cause our provincials to recognize the attention they owe to the gods rather by persuasive wordsand exhortations.
 Wherefore if any should make it his resolve that the worship of the gods shouldbe recognized, it is fitting to welcome sueh persons;
 but if some desire to follow their own worship, thou shouldest leave it in their own power.
 διόπερ ἡ σὴ καθοσίωσις τὸ ἐπιτραπέν σοι διαφυλάττειν ὀφείλει, καὶ μηδενὶ ἐξουσία δοθῇ δοθῇ τοὺς ἡμετέρους ἐπαρχιώτας ὕβρεσι καὶ σεισμοῖς ἐπιτρῖψαι, ὁπότε, ὥσπερ προγέγραπται, ταῖς προτροπαῖς μᾶλλον καὶ ταῖς κολακείαις πρὸς τὴν τῶν θεῶν θρησκείαν τοὺς ἡμετέρους ἐπαρχιώτας προσήκει ἀνακαλεῖν.
 ἵνα δὲ αὕτη ἡμῶν ἡ κέλευσις εἰς γνῶσιν πάντων τῶν ἐπαρχιωτῶν τῶν ἡμετέρων ἔλθῃ, διατάγματι ὑπὸ σοῦ προτεθέντι τὸ κεκελευσμένον ὀφείλεις δηλῶσαι.
 ” Tαῦθ᾿ ὑπὸ τῆς ἀνάγκης ἐκβεβιασμένος, ἀλλ’ οὐ κατὰ γνώμην τὴν αὐτοῦ ἐκβεβιασμένος, οὐκέτ’ ἀληθὴς οὐδ’ ἀξιόπιστος παρὰ τοῖς πᾶσιν ἢν τῆς πρόσθεν ἤδη μετὰ τὴν ὁμοίαν συγχώρησιν παλιμβόλου καὶ διεψευσμένης αὐτοῦ γνώμης ἕνεκα.
 οὔκουν ἐτόλμα τις τῶν ἡμετέρων σύνοδον συγκροτεῖν οὐδ’ ἑαυτὸν ἐν φανερῷ καταστήσασθαι, ὅτι μηδὲ τοῦτ’ ἤθελεν αὐτῷ τὸ γράμμα, αὐτὸ μόνον τὸ ἀνεπηρέαστον ἡμῖν ἐπιτρέπον φυλάττεσθαι, οὐ μὴν συνόδους ἐπικελεῦον ποιεῖσθαι οὐδ’ οἴκους ἐκκλησιῶν οἰκοδομεῖν οὐδ’ ἄλλο τι τῶν ἡμῖν συνήθων διαπράττεσθαι.
 καίτοι γε ταῦθ’ οἱ τῆς εἰρήνης καὶ εὐσεβείας προήγοροι αὐτῷ τε ἐπιτρέπειν ἐπεστάλκεσαν καὶ τοῖς ὑπ’ αὐτοὺς ἅπασιν διὰ προγραμμάτων καὶ νόμων συγκεχωρήκεσαν·
 οὐ μὴν ὁ δυσσεβέστατός γε ταύτῃ ἐνδοῦναι προῄρητο, εἰ μὴ ὅτε πρὸς τῆς θείας συνελαθεὶς δίκης ὕστατόν γε ἄκων ἐπὶ τοῦτ’ ἤχθη.
 X.
 Ἐκπεριῆλθεν δ’ αὐτὸν τοιαύτη τις αἰτία.
 τὸ μέγεθος τῆς οὐ κατ’ ἀξίαν ἐπιτραπείσης ἡγεμονίας αὐτῷ μὴ οἷός τε φέρειν, ἀλλὰ δι’ ἀπειρίαν σώφρονος καὶ βασιλικοῦ λογισμοῦ ἀπειροκάλως For this reason it behoves thy Devotedness to observe carefully that which is commanded thee, and that authority be given to none to affiict our provincials with insults and extortions, since,aswe wrote above, it is fittingto recall our provincials to the worship of the gods rather by exhortations and persuasive words.
 Αnd that this our injunction may come to the knonledge ofall our provincials, it behoves thee to make known that which has been enjoined in an ordinance put forthby thyself.
” Since he issued these commands under the compulsion of necessity and notof his own free will, no one any longer regarded him as truthful or even trustworthy, because aftera similar concession he had already on a former occasion showed himself to be changeable and false of disposition.
 Νone of our people therefore dared to convene an assembly or to present himself in public, beeause the letter did not allow him even this.
 This alone it laid down, that we shouldbe kept from harsh treatment, but it gave no orders about holding meetings or erecting chureh- buildings or practising any of our customary acts.
 Αnd yet the adnocates of peace and piety, Constantine had Licinius, had written to him to allow this, and had conceded itto all their subjects by means of edicts and laws.
 In truth, this monster of iniquityhad resolved notto give in as regards this matter;
 until he was smitten bythe divine Justice, and at the last against his will forced to do so.
 X.
 The following were the circumstance that hemmed him in.
 Ηe was unable to carry on the vast government with which he had been undeservedly entrusted;
 but, lacking a prudent and τοῖς πράγμασιν ἐγχειρῶν ἐπὶ πᾶσίν τε ὑπερηφανίας μεγαλαυχίᾳ τὴν ψυχὴν ἀλόγως ἀρθείς, ἤδη καὶ κατὰ τῶν τῆς βασιλείας κοινωνῶν, τὰ πάντα αὐτοῦ προφερόντων γένει καὶ τροφῆ καὶ παιδείᾳ ἀξιώματι τε καὶ συνέσει καὶ τῷ γε πάντων Κορυφαιοτάτῳ, σωφροσύνῃ καὶ τῇ περὶ τὸν ἀληθῆ θεὸν εὐσεβείᾳ, τολμᾶν ὥρμητο ἀναγορεύειν.
 καὶ πρῶτον ἑαυτὸν ταῖς τιμαῖς ἀναγορεύειν.
 ἐπιτείνας δ’ εἰς ἀπόνοιαν τὰ τῆς μανίας, συνθήκας ἃς πρὸς Λικίννιον πεποίητο, παρασπονδήσας, πόλεμον ἄσπονδον αἴρεται·
 εἶτ’ ἐν βραχεῖ τὰ πάντα κυκήσας πᾶσάν τε πόλιν ἐκταράξας καὶ πᾶν στρατόπεδον, μυριάδων τὸ πλῆθος ἀνηρίθμων, συναγαγών, ἕξεισιν εἰς μάχην αὐτῷ παραταξάμενος, δαιμόνων ἐλπίσιν, ὧν δὴ ᾤετο θεῶν, καὶ ταῖς τῶν ὁπλιτῶν μυριάσιν τὴν ψυχὴν ἐπηρμένος.
 Καὶ δὴ συμβαλὼν εἰς χεῖρας, ἔρημος τῆς ἐκ θεοῦ καθίσταται ἐπισκοπῆς, τῆς νίκης ἐξ αὐτοῦ τοῦ πάντων ἑνὸς καὶ μόνου θεοῦ τῷ τότε κρατοῦντι πρυτανευθείσης.
 ἀπόλλυσι δὴ πρῶτον τὸ ἐφ’ ᾧ πεποίθει ὁπλιτικόν, τῶν τε ἀμφ’ αὐτὸν δορυφόρων γυμνὸν καὶ πάντων ἔρημον αὐτὸν καταλελοιπότων τῷ τε κρατοῦντι προσπεφευγότων, ὑπεκδὺς ὁ δείλαιος ὡς τάχιστα τὸν οὐ πρέποντα αὐτῷ βασιλικὸν κόσμον, δειλῶς καὶ δυσγενῶς καὶ ἀνάνδρως ὑποδύνει τὸ πλῆθος κἄπειτα διαδιδράσκει κρυπταζόμενός τε ἀνὰ τοὺς ἀγροὺς καὶ τὰς κώμας μόλις τῶν πολεμίων τὰς χεῖρας, τὰ τῆς σωτηρίας αὐτῷ προμνώμενος, διέξεισιν, ἔργοις αὐτοῖς εὖ μάλα πιστοὺς καὶ ἀληθεῖς τοὺς θείους ἀποφήνας χρησμούς, ἐν οἷς εἴρηται“ οὐ σῴζεται βασιλεὺς διὰ imperial mind, he managedhis affairs tactlessly;
 and, above all, his soul was uplifted in an absurd manner by an overweening arrogance, actually againsthis colleaguesinthe Empire, men who were in every way his superiors in birth and upbringing and education, in worthand intelligence, and — what is mort important of all—in sobriety and piety towards the true God.
 so he beganto venture toact with insolence, and publiclyto style himself first in rank.
 Then he pushed his madness to the lengthof insanity, and, breaking the treaty he had made with Licinius, raised an internecine war.
 Νext, in a short time he threweverything into confusion, greatly disturbed every city, and, gathering togetherallthe anny, an innumerablemultitude of men,went forth to fight him in battle- array, his soul uplifted by the hopes he placed in demons, whom, forsooth, he regarded as gods, and in his myriads of armed soldiers.
 But when he joined battle, he found himself bereft of divine Providence, for, by the direction of Ηim who is the one and onlyGodof all,the victory was given to Licinius who was then ruling.
 First of all, the armed soldiers in whom he had trusted were destroyed;
 and when his bodyguard had left him defenceless and wholly deserted, and had gone over to him whowas ruling, 1 the wretched man himself with all speed of the imperial insignia that ill became him, and ina cowardly, base and unmanly way quietly slipt into the crowd.
 Then he ran about here and there, hiding himself in the helds and villages;
 and for all his courting of safety he escaped with difficulty the hands of his enemies, his deeds themselves proclaiming how very trustworthy and true are the divine oracles, in which it has been said:
 πολλὴν δύναμιν, καὶ γίγας οὐ σωθήσεται ἐν πλήθει ἰσχύος αὐτοῦ·
 ψευδὴς ἵππος εἰς σωτηρίαν, ἐν δὲ πλήθει δυνάμεως αὐτοῦ οὐ σωθήσεται.
 ἰδοὺ οἱ ὀφθαλμοὶ κυρίου ἐπὶ τοὺς φοβουμένους αὐτόν, τοὺς ἐλπίζοντας ἐπὶ τὸ ἔλεος αὐτοῦ, ῥύσασθαι ἐκ θανάτου τὰς ψυχὰς σὐτῶν.
” οὕτω δῆτα αἰσχύνης ἔμπλεως ὁ τύραννος ἐπὶ τὰ καθ’ ἑαυτὸν ἐλθὼν μέρη, πρῶτα μὲν ἐμμανεῖ θυμῷ πολλοὺς ἱερεῖς καὶ προφήτας τῶν πάλαι θαυμαζομένων αὐτῷ θεῶν, ὧν δὴ τοῖς χρησμοῖς ἀναρριπισθεὶς τὸν πόλεμον ἤρατο, ὡς ἂν γόητας καὶ ἀπατεῶνας καὶ ἐπὶ πᾶσιν προδότας τῆς αὐτοῦ γενομένους σωτηρίας ἀναιρεῖ·
 εἶτα δὲ δοὺς δόξαν τῷ Χριστιανῶν θεῷ νόμον τε τὸν ὑπὲρ ἐλευθερίας αὐτῶν τελεώτατα καὶ πληρέστατα διαταξάμενος, δυσθανατήσας αὐτίκα μηδεμιᾶς αὐτῷ χρόνου δοθείσης προθεσμίας τελευτᾷ τὸν βίον.
 Ὁ δὲ καταπεμφθεὶς ὑπ’ αὐτοῦ νόμος τοιοῦτος ἢν·
 ΑΝΤΙΓΡΑΦΟΝ ΕΡΜΗΝΕΙΑΣ ΤΗΣ ΤΟΥ ΤΥΡΑΝΝΟΥ ΧΡΙΣΤΙΑΝΩΝ ΔΙΑΤΑΞΕΩΣ ΕK ΡΩΜΑΙΚΗΣ ΕIΣ ΤΗΝ ΕΛΛΑΔΑ ΜΕΤΑΛΗΦΘΕΙΣΗΣ“ Αὐτοκράτωρ Καῖσαρ Γάϊος Οὐαλέριος Μαξιμῖνος, Γερμανικός, Σαρματικός, εὐσεβὴς εὐτυχὴς ἀνίκητος Σεβαστός.
 κατὰ πάντα τρόπον ἡμᾶς διηνεκῶς τῶν ἐπαρχιωτῶν τῶν ἡμετέρων τοῦ χρησίμου προνοεῖσθαι καὶ ταῦτα αὐτοῖς βούλεσθαι παρέχειν, οἷς τὰ λυσιτελῆ πάντων μάλιστα κατορθοῦται καὶ ὅσα τῆς λυσιτελείας καὶ τῆς χρησιμότητός ἐστιν τῆς κοινῆς αὐτῶν καὶ ὁποῖα πρὸς τὴν δημοσίαν λυσιτέλειαν ἁρμόξει καὶ ταῖς ἑκάστων“ There is no king savedby much power, and a giant will not be saved by his great strength.
 Α horse isavainthing for safety, and will notbe saved by his great power.
 Behold, the eyesofthe Lord are upon them that fear him, upon them that hope in his mercy;
 to deliver their souls from death.
” then,did the tyrant, filled with shame, come to his own territory.
 Αnd first in his mad fury he put to death many priests and prophets of those gods who had formerly been his admiration, and whose oracles had incited him to beginthe war,on the ground that they were charlatans and deceivers and, above all, betrayers of his safety.
 Νext, he gave glory to the Christians’ God, and drew upa law on behalf of their liberty in the most complete and fullest manner.
 Then straightway, no respitebeing granted him,he ended his lifebya miserable death.
 Νow the law issued by him was as follows:
 Copy of a Translation of the Ordinanceofthe Tyrant οn behalfofthe Christians, made from the Latin tongue into the Greek.
“ The Emperor Caesar Gaius Valerius Maximinus Germanicus, Sarmaticus, Ρius Felix Invictus Augustus.
 We beheve that nooneis ignorant,nay that everymanwho has recoursetothe facts knowsand is conscious that it is manifest, that in every way we take unceasing thought for the good of our provincials, and desire to grant them such things as are best calculated to secure the advantage of all, and διανοίαις προσφιλῆ τυγχάνει, οὐδένα ἀγνοεῖν, ἀλλ’ ἕκαστον ἀνατρέχειν ἐπ’ αὐτὸ τὸ γινόμενον γινώσκειν τε ἕκαστον τῶν ἀνθρώπων καὶ ἔχειν ἐν ἑαυτῷ δῆλον εἶναι πιστεύομεν.
 ὁπότε τοίνυν πρὸ τούτου δῆλον γέγονεν τῇ γνώσει τῇ ἡμετέρᾳ ἐκ ταύτης τῆς προφάσεως ἐξ ἧς κεκελευσμένον ἢν ὑπὸ τῶν θειοτάτων Διοκλητιανοῦ καὶ Μαξιμιανοῦ, τῶν γονέων τῶν ἡμετέρων, τὰς συνόδους τῶν χριστιανῶν ἐξηρῆσθαι, πολλοὺς σεισμοὺς καὶ ἀποστερήσεις ὑπὸ τῶν ὀφφικιαλίων γεγενῆσθαι, καὶ εἰς τοὐπιὸν δὲ τοῦτο προχωρεῖν κατὰ τῶν ἐπαρχιωτῶν τῶν ἡμετέρων, ὧν μάλιστα πρόνοιαν τὴν προσήξκουσαν γίνεσθαι σπουδάζομεν, τῶν οὐσιῶν τῶν ἰδίων αὐτῶν κατατριβομένων, δοθέντων γραμμάτων πρὸς τοὺς ἡγεμόνας ἑκάστης ἐπαρχίας τῷ παρελθόντι ἐνιαυτῷ ἐνομοθετήσαμεν ἵν’ εἴ τις βούλοιτο τῷ τοιούτῳ ἔθει ἢ τῇ αὐτῇ φυλακῆ τῆς θρῃσκείας ἕπεσθαι, τοῦτον ἀνεμποδίστως ἔχεσθαι τῆς προθέσεως τῆς ἑαυτοῦ ὑπὸ μηδενὸς ἐμποδίζεσθαι μηδὲ κωλύεσθαι καὶ εἶναι αὐτοῖς εὐχέρειαν δίχα τινὸς φόβου καὶ ὑποψίας τοῦθ’ ὅπερ ἑκάστῳ ἀρέσκει, ποιεῖν.
 πλὴν οὐδὲ νῦν λαθεῖν ἡμᾶς ἐδυνήθη ὅτι τινὲς τῶν δικαστῶν παρενεθυμοῦντο τὰς ἡμετέρας κελεύσεις καὶ διατάξειν τοὺς ἡμετέρους ἀνθρώπους περὶ τὰ προστάγματα τὰ ἡμέτερα παρεσκεύασαν καὶ ὀκνηρότερον προσιέναι ταύταις ταῖς θρῃσκίαις αἷς ἢν ἀρεστὸν αὐτοῖς, ἐποίησαν.
” Ἵνα τοίνυν εἰς τὸ ἑξῆς πᾶσα ὑποψία ἢ ἀμφιβολία τοῦ φόβου περιαιρεθῇ, τοῦτο τὸ διάταγμα προτεθῆναι ἐνομοθετήσαμεν, ἵνα πᾶσιν δῆλον γένηται ἐξεῖναι τούτοις οἵτινες ταύτην τὴν αἵρεσιν καὶ τὴν whatsoeverthings are advantageousand useful totheircommon weal, and such as are suitable to the public advantage and agreeable to every mind Since, therefore, before thisit has been evident to our knowledge that, on the plea that the most divine Diocletianand Μaximian, our fathers, had orders for the abolishment of the Christian assemblies, many extortions and robberies have been practisedby the officials, and that this increased as time went on to the detriment of our provincials( for whose gooditis our especialderire that there should bedue thought), and that their own personal possessions were being destroyed:
 We addresseda letter to the governors in eaeh province last year, laying it down that if any should wish to follow sucha custom or the same religious observances, such aone should adhere to his purpose without hindrance, and be hindered or prevented by no one;
 and that they should havea free hand, without fear and suspicion, to do whatsoever each one pleases.
 But it cannot escape our notice even now that some ofthe judges misinterpretedour injunctions,and caused our people to have doubts with regard to our commands, and made them somewhat backward in joining in those religious observances that were pleasing to them.
“ That, therefore, for the future all suspicion or doubt arising from fearmay be removed, we have decreed that this ordinancebe published,so that it may be plain to all that those who desire to follow θρῃσκείαν μετιέναι βούλονται, ἐκ ταύτης τῆς δωρεᾶς τῆς ἡμετέρας, καθὼς ἕκαστος βούλεται ἢ ἡδέα αὐτῷ ἐστιν, οὕτως προσιέναι τῇ θρῃσκείᾳ ταύτῃ ἢν ἐξ ἔθους θρῃσκεύειν εἵλετο.
 καὶ τὰ κυριακὰ δὲ τὰ οἰκεῖα ὅπως κατασκευάζοιεν, συγκεχώρηται.
 ἵνα μέντοι καὶ μείζων γένηται ἡ ἡμετέρα δωρεά, καὶ τοῦτο νομοθετῆσαι κατηξιώσαμεν ἵνα εἴ τινες οἰκίαι καὶ χωρία ἃ, τοῦ δικαίου τοῦ τῶν Χριστιανῶν πρὸ τούτου ἐτύγχανον ὄντα, ἐκ τῆς κελεύσεως τῶν γονέων τῶν ἡμετέρων εἰς τὸ δίκαιον μετέπεσεν τοῦ φίσκου ἢ ὑπό τινος κατελήφθη πόλεως, εἴτε διάπρασις τούτων γεγένηται εἴτε εἰς χάρισμα δέδοταί τινι, ταῦτα πάντα εἰς τὸ ἀρχαῖον δίκαιον τῶν Χριστιανῶν ἀνακληθῆναι ἐκελεύσαμεν, γα καὶ ἐν τούτῳ τῆς ἡμετέρας εὐσεβείας καὶ τῆς προνοίας αἴσθησιν πάντες λάβωσιν.
 ” Αὖται τοῦ τυράννου φωναί, οὐδ’ ὅλον ἐνιαυτὸν τῶν κατὰ χριστιανῶν ἐν στήλαις ἀνατεθειμένων αὐτῷ διαταγμάτων ὑστερήσασαι, καὶ παρ’ ᾧ γε μικρῷ πρόσθεν δυσσεβεῖς ἐδοκοῦμεν καὶ ἄθεοι καὶ παντὸς ὄλεθροι τοῦ βίου, ὡς μὴ ὅτι γε πόλιν, ἀλλ’ οὐδὲ χώραν οὐδ’ ἐρημίαν οἰκεῖν ἐπιτρέπεσθαι, παρὰ τούτῳ διατάξεις ὑπὲρ Χριστιανῶν καὶ νομοθεσίαι συνετάττοντο, καὶ οἱ πρὸ βραχέος πυρὶ καὶ σιδήρῳ θηρίων τε καὶ οἰωνῶν βορᾷ πρὸ ὀφθαλμῶν αὐτοῦ διαφθειρόμενοι καὶ πᾶν εἶδος κολάσεως καὶ τιμωρίας ἀπαλλαγῆς τε βίου οἰκτρότατα ὡς ἂν ἄθεοι καὶ δυσσεβεῖς ὑπομένοντες, οὗτοι νῦν πρὸς τοῦ αὐτοῦ καὶ θρῃσκεύειν ὁμολογοῦνται θρῃσκείαν καὶ ἐπισκευάζειν κυριακὰ ἐπιτρέπονται, καὶ δικαίων τινῶν αὐτοῖς μετεῖναι αὐτὸς ὁ τύραννος ὁμολογεῖ.
 this sect and religious observance are permitted, in accordance withthisour bounty,as each one wishes οr finds it pleasing,to join in that religious observance which from choice he was wont to praetise.
 Αnd permission has also been granted them to buildthe Lord's houses.
 Nevertheless, that our bountymaybe even greater, we have decided to decree this also :
 that if anyhousesor lands, which used formerly to belong by right to the Christians, have by the injunction of our parents into the right of the public treasury or have been sriIed by any city— whethera sale of these has taken place, or they have been handed over to anyone asa gift— we have given οrders that all thesebe restored to the Christiansastheir original right, so thatin this alsoallmay perceive οur pietyand solicitude.
” These are the words of the tyrant that came less than a whole year after the ordinances against the Christians, set up by him on tablets;
 and he whoa short while previously looked upon us as impious and godless and the pestsof society,so that we were not pennirtedto dwen in, I will not say,a city, but evena spot in the counrty ora desert— this same persondrewup ordinances and legislation on behalf οf the Christians;
 and those who shortly before were being destroyed by fire and sword and given to wild beasts and birds for food before his eyes, and were enduring every kind of chastisement and punishment and loss of life in the most pitiable manner, as if they were godless and wicked, these henow allows bothto observe their fonn worship and to build churches;
 and the tyrant himself confesses that they possess certain rights! Καὶ δὴ τοιαῦτα ἐξομολογησάμενος, ὥσπερ τινὸς τυχὼν εὐεργεσίας τούτων δὴ αὐτῶν ἕνεκα, ἧττον ἢ παθεῖν αὐτὸν χρῆν δήπου παθών, ἀθρόᾳ θεοῦ πληγεὶς μάστιγι ἐν δευτέρᾳ τοῦ πολέμου συμβολῇ καταστρέφει·
 γίνεται δ’ αὐτῷ τὰ τῆς καταστροφῆς οὐχ οἷα στρατηγοῖς πολεμάρχαις ὑπὲρ ἀρετῆς καὶ γνωρίμων πολλάκις ἀνδριζομένοις ἐν πολέμῳ τὴν εὐκλεῆ τελευτὴν εὐθαρσῶς ὑπομεῖναι συνέβη, ἀλλὰ γὰρ ἅτε τις δυσσεβὴς καὶ θεομάχος, τῆς παρατάξεως ἔτ᾿ αὐτῷ πρὸ τοῦ πεδίου συνεστώσης μένων αὐτὸς καὶ κρυοραζόμεωος, τὴν προσήκουσαν τιμωρίαν ὑπέχει, ἀθρόᾳ θεοῦ πληγεὶς καθ’ ὅλου τοῦ σώματος μάστιγι, ὡς ἀλγηδόσιν δειναῖς καὶ περιωδυνίαις ἐλαυνόμενον πρηνῆ καταπεσεῖν, λιμῷ φθειρόμενον τάς τε σάρκας ὅλας ἀοράτῳ καὶ θεηλάτῳ πυρὶ τηκόμενον, ὡς διαρρεύσαντα τὸ μὲν πᾶν εἶδος τῆς παλαιᾶς μορφῆς ἀφανισθῆναι, ξηρῶνδ’ αὐτὸ μόνον ὀστέων οἷόν τι μακρῷ χρόνῳ κατεσκεΛετευμένον εἴδωλον ὑπολειφθῆναι, ὡς μηδ’ ἄλλο τι νομίζειν τοὺς παρόντας ἢ τάφον αὐτῷ τῆς ψυχῆς γεγονέναι τὸ σῶμα, ἐν ἤδη νεκρῷ καὶ παντελῶς ἀπορρεύσαντι κατορωρυγμένης.
 σφοδρότερον δ’ ἔτι μᾶλλον τῆς θέρμης αὐτὸν ἐκ βάθους μυελῶν καταφλεγούσης, προπησῶσιν μὲν αὐτῷ τὰ ὄμματα καὶ τῆς ἰδίας λήξεως ἀποπεσόντα πηρὸν αὐτὸν ἀφίησιν, ὃ δ’ ἐπὶ τούτοις ἔτ’ ἐμπνέων ἀνθομολογούμενος τῷ κυρίῳ θάνατον ἐπεκαλεῖτο, καὶ τὸ πανύστατον ἐνδίκως ταῦτα τῆς κατὰ τοῦ Χριστοῦ παροινίας χάριν ὁμολογήσας παθεῖν, τὴν ψυχὴν ἀφίησιν.
 Αnd when he had made these confessions, as if meeting with some kind of reward on this very account— that is,suffering less, to be sure, than behoved him to suffer—he was smittenall at onceastroke of God,and perished inthe second οf the war.
 But the circumstances of his death were not such as fall to the lot of generahona campaign,who time after time contend bravely on behalf of virtueand friends, and witha good courage meeta glorious end in battle;
 but he suffered his due punishment like an impious enemyof God, skulking at home while his army was still stationed in battlearray on the neld.
 Αll at once hewas smitten bya stroke of God over his whole body, with the result that he fell prone under the onslaught of terrible pains and agonies;
 he was wastedby hunger,and his flesh entirely consumed by an invisible, divinelysent fire;
 the form which his body once possessed wasted away and there and there remained only a form οf dry bones, like some phantom shape long since reduced toa skeleton,so that those present could not but think that his body become the tombof his soul, which had been buried in what was now a corpse and completely wasted away.
 Αnd as the heat consumedhim still more foerce;
u in the verydepthsοf his marrow,his eyes projected, and falling from their sockets1 left him blind.
 Yet he still breathed in this condition, and making confession to the Lord invoked death.
 So with his last breath he acknowledged that he suffered thus justly because of his violence against Christ;
 and then gave up the ghost.
 Xl.
 Οὕτω δῆτα Mαξιμίνου ἐκποδὼν γενομένου, ὃς μόνος ἔτι λείπων τῶν τῆς θεοσεβείας ἐχθρῶν, ἁπάντων χείριστος ἀναπέφηνεν, τὰ μὲν τῆς τῶν ἐκκλησιῶν ἀνανεώσεως ἐκ θεμελίων χάριτι θεοῦ τοῦ παντοκράτορος ἠγείρετο ὅ τε τοῦ χριστοῦ λόγος, εἰς δόξαν τοῦ τῶν ὅλων θεοῦ διαλάμπων, μείζονα τῆς τρόσθεν ἀπελάμβανεν παρρησίαν, τὰ δὲ τῆς δυσσεβείας τῶν τῆς θεοσεβείας ἐχθρῶν αἰσχύνης ἐσχάτης καὶ ἀτιμίας ἐνεπίμπλατο.
 πρῶτός τε γὰρ Μαξιμῖνος αὐτὸς κοινὸς ἁπάντων πολέμιος ὑπὸ τῶν κρατούντων ἀναγορευθείς, δυσσεβέστατος καὶ δυσωυμώτατος καὶ θεομισέστατος τύραννος διὰ προγραμμάτων δημοσίων ἀνεστηλίτευτο, γραφαί τε ὅσαι εἰς τιμὴν αὐτοῦ τε καἰ τῶν αὐτοῦ παίδων κατὰ πᾶσαν ἀνέκειντο πόλιν, αἰ μὲν ἐξ ὕφους εἰς ἔδαφος ῥιπτούμεναι συνετρίβοντο, αἰ δὲ τὰς προσόψεις ἠχρειοῦντο σκοτεινῷ χρώματι καταμελανούμεναι, ἀνδριάντων τε ὁμοίως ὁπόσοι εἰς αὐτοῦ τιμὴν διανεστήκεσαν, ὡσαύτως ῥιπτούμενοι συνετρίβοντο, γέλως καὶ παιδιὰ τοῖς ἐνυβρίζειν καὶ ἐμπαροινεῖν ἐθέλουσιν ἐκκείμενοι.
 Εἶτα δὲ καὶ τῶν ἄλλων τῆς θεοσεβείας ἐχθρῶν πᾶσαι τιμαὶ περιῃροῦντο, ἐκτείνοντο δὲ καὶ πάντες οἱ τὰ Μαξιμίνου φρονοῦντες, ὅσοι μάλιστα τῶν ἐν ἀρχικοῖς ἀξιώμασιν ὑπ’ αὐτοῦ τετιμημένοι τῇ πρὸς αὐτὸν κολακείᾳ σοβαρῶς ἐνεπαροίνησαν τῷ καθ’ ἡμᾶς λόγῳ·
 οἷος ἢν ὁ παρὰ πάντας αὐτῷ τιμιώτατος καὶ αἰδεσιμώτατος ἑταίρων τε γνησιώτατος Πευκέτιος, δὶς ὕπατος καὶ τρὶς ὕπατος καἰ τῶν καθόλου λόγων ἔπαρχος πρὸς αὐτοῦ καθεσταμένος, Κουλκιανός τε ὡσαύτως διὰ πάσης ἀρχικῆς προελθὼν ἐξουσίας, ὁ καὶ αὐτὸς μυρίοις τοῖς κατ’ XI.
 when Maximin was thus removed—he who as theonlyοne left οf theenemiesof godliness,d showed himself the worst of al— by the grace of Almightly God the renewal of the churches from the foundation was set on foot, and the word of Christ received a due increase upon its fonner freedom, and was clearly heard to the glory of the God of the universe;
;
 while the impiety οf the enemies of godlness was covered with the most abject shame and dishonour.
 For Maximin himself was the first to be proclaimed by the rulers asa common enemy οf all, and posted in public edicts on tablets asa most impious, most hateful and God- hating tyrant.
 As to theportraits which wereset up in every city to his honour and that of his children, some were hurled froma height to the ground and smashed to pieces, others had their faces blackened over with darkcoloured paint and so rendered useless;
 the statues likewise, as manyas had beensetup in his honour, were cast down and broken in the same manner, and layas an objectof merriment and sport to thosewhowished to insultor abuse them.
 Next, all thehonours of the other enemiesof godliness alsowere taken away, and all who were οf the arty of Maximinwere slain, especially those in high government positions who had been honoured by him, and who indulged in violent abuse against our doctrine in order to fawn upon him.
 such was Peucetius,a man whom he honoured and respected above all, the truestof his friends, consul a second anda third time, and appointed by him general finance minister;
 such likewise was Culeianus, who had gone through every grade of offiee in the government,the same person who gloried in the murder Αἴγυπτον χριστιανῶν ἐλλαμπρυνάμενος αἵμασιν, ἄλλοι τε ἐπὶ τούτοις οὐκ ὀλίγοι, δι’ ὧν μάλιστα τὰ τῆς Μαξιμίνου τυραννίδος ἐκραταιοῦτό τε καὶ ηὔξετο.
 Εκάλει δὲ ἄρα καὶ Θεότεκνον ἡ δίκη, οὐδαμῶς τὰ κατὰ Χριστιανῶν αὐτῷ πεπραγμένα λήθη παραδιδοῦσα.
 ἐπὶ μὲν γὰρ τῷ κατ’ Ἀντιόχειαν ἱδρυθέντι πρὸς αὐτοῦ ξοάνῳ δόξας εὐημερεῖν, ἤδη καὶ ἡγεμονίας ἠξίωτο παρὰ Μαξιμίνου, Λικίννιοςδ’ ἐπιβὰς τῆς Ἀντιοχέων πόλεως φώραν τε γοήτων ποιησάμενος, τοὺς τοῦ νεοπαγοῦς ξοάνου προφήτας καὶ ἱερεῖς βασάνοις ᾐκίζετο, τίνι λόγῳ τὴν ἀπάτην καθυποκρίνοιντο, πυνθανόμενος·
 ὡς δ’ ἐπικρύπτεσθαι αὐτοῖς πρὸς τῶν βασάνων συνελαυνομένοις ἀδύνατον ἢν, ἐδήλουν δὲ τὸ πᾶν μυστήριον ἀπάτην τυγχάνειν τέχνῃ τῇ Θεοτέκνου μεμηχανημένην, τοῖς πᾶσιν τὴν ἀξίαν ἐπιθεὶς δίκην, πρῶτον αὐτὸν Θεότεκνον, εἶτα δὲ καὶ τοὺς τῆς γοητείας κοινωνοὺς μετὰ πλείστας ὅσας αἰκίας θανάτῳ παραδίδωσιν.
 τούτοις ἅπασιν προσετίθεντο καὶ οἱ Μαξιμίνου παῖδες, οὓς ἤδη καὶ τῆς βασιλικῆς τιμῆς τῆς τε ἐν πίναξιν καὶ γραφαῖς ἀναθέσεως πεποίητο κοινωνούς·
 οἱ συγγένειαν δὲ τοῦ τυράννου τὸ πρὶν αὐχοῦντες καὶ πάντας ἀνθρώπους καταδυναστεύειν ἐπηρμένοι τὰ αὐτὰ τοῖς προδεδηλωμένοις μετὰ τῆς ἐσχάτης ἀτιμίας ἔπασχον, ἐπεὶ μὴ ἐδέξαντο παιδείαν μηδὲ ἔγνωσαν μηδὲ συνῆκαν τὴν φάσκουσαν ἐν ἱεροῖς λόγοις παρακέλευσιν“ μὴ πεποίθετε ἑ ἐπ’ ἄρχοντας, ἐπὶ υἱοὺς ἀνθρώπων, οἷς οὐκ ἔστιν σωτηρία·
 ἐξελεύσεται τὸ πνεῦμα αὐτοῦ καὶ ἀποστρέψει τὴν γῆν αὐτοῦ·
 ἐν ἐκείνῃ τῆ ἡμέρᾳ countless Christians in Egypt;
 and in addition to these nota few others, who were the chief means of confirming and increasing Maximin 's tyranny.
 So it was that Theotecnus also was summoned by Justice, who in no wiseconsignedto oblivion what he did againstthe Christians.
 For after he had set up the idol1 at Antioch, he seemedto be prospering, and had actually been deemed worthy ofa governorship by Maximin;
 but when Licinius came to the city οf the Antiochenes,he madeasearch for charlatans, and plied with tortures the the prophets and priests of the new- made idol, to findoutby what contrivance they were practising this deceit.
 Αnd when the infliction of the tortures made concealment impossiblefor them,and they revealed that the whole mystery wasa deceit manufactured by theartof Theotecnus, he inflicteda just punishmentupon them all, putting to death, arter along series οf tortures,first neotecnus himself, and then also the partners in his charlatanry.
 To all these were added the sons οf Maximin, whom he had already caused to share the imperial dignity and to be set up in paintings and pictures.
 2 Αnd those who formerly boasted kinship with the tyrant and were moved by pride to lord it οver allmen underwentthesame sufferings, accompanied by the most abject disgrace, as those mentioned above;
 for they received not correction, nor did they know or understand the exhortatlon in the sacred books which says:
“ Ρut not yourtrustln princes, in the sons of men, in whom there is no help His breath shall go forth and he shall return to his ἀπολοῦνται πάντες οἱ διαλογισμοὶ αὐτῶν.
” οὕτω δῆτα τῶν δυσσεβῶν ἐκκαθαρθέντων, μόνοις ἐφυλάττετο τὰ τῆς προσηκούσης βασιλείας βέβαιά τε καὶ ἀνεπίφθονα Κωνσταντίνῷ καὶ Λικιννίῳ·
 οἳ τῶν πρόσθεν ἁπάντων ἐκκαθάραντες τοῦ βίου τὴν θεοεχθρίαν, τῶν ἐκ θεοῦ πρυτανεθέντων ἀγαθῶν αὐτοῖς ᾖσθημένως τὸ φιλάρετον καὶ θεοφιλὲς τό τε πρὸς τὸ θεῖον εὐσεβὲς καὶ εὐχάριστον διὰ τῆς ὑπὲρ χριστιανῶν ἐνεδείξαντο νομοθεσίας.
 1 earth.
 In that dayallhis thoughts shall perish.
 ” 1 Thus verily when the impious ones had been purged away, the kingdom that belonged to them was preserved stedfast and undisputed for Constantine and Licinius alone;
 who, when they had made it their very first action to purge the world of enmity against God, conscious ofthe good things that Ηe hadbestowed upon them, displayed their love of virtue and of God, their piety and gratitude towards the Deity, by their enactmenton behalfof the Christians.
 Ιݲ τάδε καὶ ἡ δεκάτη περιέχει βίβλος τῆς Εκκλησιαστικῆς ἰατορίας Αݲ Περὶ τῆς ἐκ θεοῦ πρυτανευθείσης ἡμῖν εἰρήνης.
 Bݲ Περὶ τῆς τῶν ἐκκλησιῶν ἀνανεώσεως.
 Γݲ Περὶ τῶν κατὰ πάντα τόπον ἐγκαινίων.
 Δݲ Πανηγυρικὸς ἐπὶ τῆ τῶν πραγμάτων φαιδρότητι.
 Εݲ’ Ἀντίγραφα βασιλικῶν νόμων περὶ τῶν Χριστιανῶν προσηκόντων.
 ςݲ Περὶ τῆς τῶν κληρικῶν ἀλειτουργνσίας.
 Ζݲ Περὶ τῆς Λικιννίου εἰς ὕστερον κακοτροπίας καὶ τῆς καταστροφῆς αὐτοῦ.
 Ηݲ Περὶ τῆς νίκης Κωνσταντίνου καὶ τῶν ὑπ’ αὐτοῦ τοῖς ὑπὸ τὴν Ῥωμαίων ἐξουσίαν ὑπαρξάντων.
 CONTENTS OF BOOKX The Τenth Book of the Ecclesiastical History contains the following:
 I.
 On the peace vouchsafed to us from God.
 II.
 On the restorationof the churches.
 III.
 On the dedicationsin every place.
 IV Panegyric οnthe joyful condiition of affairs.
 V.
 Copies of imperial laws having reference to the Christians.
 VI.
 Οn the exemption from public service granted to the clerics.
 VII.
 On the subsequent wiekedness οf Lieinius and his tragic end.
 VIII.
 On the victory Constantine and the blessings which he was the means of procuring for the subjects of the Roman Empire.
Ι I.
 Θεῷ δὴ χάρις ἐπὶ πᾶσιν τῷ παντοκράτορι καὶ βασιλεῖ τῶν ὅλων, πλείστη δὲ καὶ τῷ σωτῆρι καὶ λυτρωτῇ τῶν ψυχῶν ἡμῶν Ἰησοῦ Χριστῷ, δι’ οὗ τὰ τῆς εἰρήνης ἔκ τε τῶν ἔξωθεν ὀχληρῶν καὶ τῶν κατὰ διάνοιαν βέβαια καὶ ἀσάλευτα φυλάττεσθαι ἡμῖν διὰ παντὸς εὐχόμεθα.
 Ἅμα δὲ εὐχαῖς καὶ τὸν δέκατον ἐν τούτῳ τοῖς προδιεξοδευθεῖσιντῆς Ἐκκλησιαστικῆς ἱστορίας ἐπιθέντες τόμον, ἀοῖ τοῦτον ἐπιγράφομεν, ἱερώτατέ μοι Παυλῖνε, ὥσπερ ἐπισφράγισμά σε τῆς ὑποθέσεως ἀναβοώμενοι, εἰκότωςδ’ ἐν ἀριθμῷ τελείῳ τὸν τέλειον ἐνταῦθα καὶ πανηγυρικὸν τῆς τῶν ἐκκλησιῶν κλησιῶν ἀνανεώσεως λόγον κατατάξομεν, θείῳ πνεύματι πειθαρχοῦντες ὧδέ πως ἐγκελευομένῳ“ ᾄσατε τῷ κυρίῳ ᾆσμα καινόν, ὅτι θαυμαστὰ ἐποίησεν·
 ἔσωσεν αὐτῷ ἡ δεξιὰ αὐτοῦ καὶ ὁ βραχίων ὁ ἅγιος αὐτοῦ·
 ἐγνώρισεν κύριος τὸ σωτήριον αὐτοῦ, ἐναντίον τῶν ἐθνῶν ἀπεκάλυψεν τὴν δικαιοσύνην αὐτοῦ’ Καὶ δὴ τῷ λογίῳ προστάττοντι τὸ καινὸν ᾆσμα διὰ τοῦδε νῦν ἀκολούθως ἐπιφωνῶμεν ὅτι δὴ μετὰ τὰς δεινὰς καὶ σκοτεινὰς ἐκείνας ὄφεις τε καὶ διηγήσεις τοιαῦτα νῦν ὁρᾶν καὶ τοιαῦτα πανηγυρίζειν BOOKXI.
 Thanks be to God, the Almighty and King ofthe universe,for all things;
 and abundant thanks be also the Saviour and Redeemer of our souls, Jesus Christ, through whom we praycontinually that peace fromtroubles without and troublesinthe heart maybepreserved for us stedfastand unidsturbed.
 Αnd having now added, while we pray, the tenth tome also of the Ecclesiastical History to those which preceded it, we shall dedicate this tome to thee, my οst holy Paulinus,1 invoking theeas the sealof the whole work;
 and fitly ina perfect number we shall here place the perfect and panegyrical discourse on the restoration of the churches, in obediencce to the divine Spirit who thus exhorts us:
 “O sing unto the Lordanew song;
 for he hath done marvellous things:
 His right hand, and His holy arm, hath wrought salvation for him.
 The Lord hath made wnhis salvation:
 His righteousness hath Ηe revealed in the sight of the heathen.
 Αnd verily, in accordance with the oracle, which thus bids us, let us now cryaloudthe new song, since, after those terrible and gloomy spectacle and narratives, we were accounted worthy nowto behold ἠξιώθημεν, οἷα τῶν πρὸ ἡμῶν πολλοὶ τῷ ὄντι δίκαιοι καὶ θεοῦ μάρτυρες ἐπεθύμησαν ἐπὶ γῆς ἰδεῖν, καὶ οὐκ εἶδον, καὶ ἀκοῦσαι, καὶ οὐκ ἤκουσαν.
 ἀλλ’ οἳ μὲν ἦ τάχος σπεύσαντες τῶν πολὺ κρειτ- τόνων ἔτυχον ἐν αὐτοῖς οὐρανοῖς καὶ παραδείσῳ τῆς ἐνθέου τρυφῆς ἀναρπασθέντες, ἡμεῖς δὲ καὶ τάδε μείζονα ἢ καθ’ ἡμᾶς ὑπάρχειν ὁμολογοῦντες, ὑπερεκπεπλήγμεθα μὲν τῆς τοῦ αἰτίου μεγαλοδωρεᾶς τὴν χάριν, θαυμάζομεν δὲ εἰκότως ὅλης ψυχῆς δυνάμει σέβοντες καὶ ταῖς ἀναγράπτοις προρρήσεσιν ἀλήθειαν ἐπιμαρτυροῦντες, δι’ ὧν εἴρηται·
“ δεῦτε καὶ ἴδετε τὰ ἔργα κυρίου, ἃ ἔθετο τέρατα ἐπὶ τῆς γῆς, ἀνταναιρῶν πολέμους μέχρι τῶν περάτων τῆς γῆς·
 τόξον συντρίψει καὶ συγκλάσει ὅπλον, καὶ θυρεοὺς κατακαύσει ἐν πυρί’’·
 ἐφ’ οἷς ἐναργῶς εἰς ἡμᾶς πεπληρωμένοις χαίροντες, τὸν ἐφεξῆς συνείρωμεν λόγον.
 Ἠφάνιστο μὲν δὴ καθ’ ὃν δεδήλωται τρόπον πᾶν τὸ τῶν θεομισῶν γένος καὶ τῆς ἀνθρώπων ἀθρόως ὄφεως οὕτως ἐξαλήλειπτο, ὡς πάλιν ῥῆμα θεῖον τέλος ἔχειν τὸ λέγον·
“ εἶδον ἀσεβῆ ὑπερυψούμενον καὶ ὑπεραιρόμενον ὡς τὰς κέδρους τοῦ Λιβάνου·
 καὶ παρῆλθον, καὶ ἰδοὺ οὐκἢν, καὶ ἐζήτησα τὸν τόπον αὐτοῦ, καὶ οὐχ εὑρέθη”.
 ἡμέρα δὲ λοιπὸν ἤδη φαιδρὰ καὶ διαυγής, μηδενὸς νέφους αὐτὴν ἐπισκιάζοντος, φωτὸς οὐρανίου βολαῖς ἀνὰ τὴν οἰκουμένην ἅπασαν ταῖς ἐκκλησίαις τοῦ Χριστοῦ κατηύγαζεν, οὐδέ τις ἢν καὶ τοῖς ἔξωθεν τοῦ καθ’ ἡμᾶς θιάσου φθόνος συναπολαύειν εἰ μὴ andtocelebrate in panegyric such things as οfa many righteous menand martyrs ofGod Before desired to see upon earth and saw them not, and hear, and heard them not.
 But they indeed ting with all speed, obtained far better things in the heavens themselves and were caught up intoa aradise of divine pleasure;
 while we, acknowledge that even these present things are beyond our, have been utterly astounded at the munificence οf the bounty of which Ηeisthe Αuthor, andhour whole soul's might fittingly render Ηim awe and worship, attesting the truth ofthe written preedictions, whereinit is said:
“ came and behold the works οfthe Lord, what wondersΗehath the earth, making wars to cease unto the ends of the earth.
 Ηe break break the bow and shatter the ur, and the shields he will bum with fire.
” Rejoicing that these things have been clearly fuld tous- ward, led us proceed to take up οur narrative.
 The whole race of God's enemies had verily been moved even as we have stated, 1 and ina moment lotted out of men's sight;
 so that oncemorea divineyinghath fulfilment, that which says:
 “I have seene wicked in great power, and lifted up like the cedarsf Leganon.
 ΑndI passed by, and, lo, he was not:
 dI sought his place, and it was not” nd how henceforthaday bright and radiant with ysof heavenly light, overshadowed by never a ud, shone down upon the churches of Christ ughout the whole world;
 nor were even those utisde οursociety2 grudged, if not the equal enjoyment τῶν ἴσων, ἀπορροῆςδ’ οὖν ὅμως καὶ μετουσίας τῶν θεόθεν ἡμῖν πρυτανευθέντων.
 ΙΙ.
 Πᾶσι μὲν οὖν ἀνθρώποις τὰ ἐκ τῆς τῶν τυράννων καταδυναστείας ἐλεύθερα ἢν, καὶ τῶν προτέρων ἀπηλλαγμένοι κακῶν, ἄλλος ἄλλως μόνον ἀληθῆ θεὸν τὸν τῶν εὐσεβῶν ὑπέρμαχον ὡμολόγει·
 μάλιστα δ’ ἡμῖν τοῖς ἐπὶ τὸν Χριστὸν τοῦ θεοῦ τὰς ἐλπίδας ἀνηρτημένοις ἄλεκτος παρῆν εὐφροσύνη καί τις ἔνθεος ἄνθεος ἐπήνθει χαρὰ πάντα τόπον τὸν πρὸ μικροῦ ταῖς τῶν τυράννων δυσσεβείαις σεβείαις ἠριπωμένον ὥαπερ ἐκ μακρᾶς καὶ θανατηφόρου λύμης ἀναβιώσκοντα θεωμένοις νεώς τε αὖθις ἐκ βάθρων εἰς ὕφος ἄπειρον ἐγειρομένους καὶ πολὺ κρείττονα τὴν ἀγλαΐαν τῶν πάλαι πεπολιορκημένων ἀπολαμβάνοντας.
 Ἀλλὰ καὶ βασιλεῖς οἱ ἀνωτάτω συνεχέσι ταῖς ὑπὲρ Χριστιανῶν νομοθρδίσις τὰ τῆς ἐκ θεοῦ μεγαλοδωρεᾶς ἡμῖν εἰς μακρὸν ἔτι καὶ μεῖξον ἐκράτυνον, ἐφοίτα δὲ καὶ εἰς πρόσωπον ἐπισκόποις βασιλέως γράμματα καὶ τιμαὶ καὶ χρημάτων δόσεις·
 ὧν οὐκ ἀπὸ τρόπου γένοιτ’ ἂν κατὰ τὸν προσήκοντα καιρὸν τοῦ λόγου, ὥσπερ ἐν ἱερᾷ στήλῃ, τῇδε τῆ βίβλῳ τὰς φωνὰς ἐκ τῆς Ῥωμαίων ἐπὶ τὴν Ἑλλάδα γλῶσσαν μεταληφθείσας ἐγχαράξαι, ὡς ἂν καὶ τοῖς μεθ’ ἡμᾶς ἅπασιν φέροιντο διὰ μνήμης.
 ΙΙΙ.
 Ἐπὶ δὴ τούτοις τὸ πᾶσιν εὐκταῖον ἡμῖν καὶ ποθούμενον συνεκροτεῖτο θέαμα, ἐγκαινίων ἑορταὶ κατὰ πόλεις καὶ τῶν ἄρτι νεοπαγῶν προσευκτηρίων ἀφιερώσεις, ἐπισκόπων ἐπὶ ταὐτὸν συνηλύσεις, τῶν πόρρωθεν ἐξ ἀλλοδαπῆς συνδρομαί, λαῶν εἰς λαοὺς φιλοφρονήσεις, τῶν ριστοῦ σώματος μελῶν of our divinely- sent blessings, at any rate a in their effluence and a participation thereof.
 II.
 So the whole human race was freed from the oppression οf the tyrants.
 Αnd, delivered fromhis former ills, each one after his own fashion acknowledged as the only true God Him who was the Champion of the pious.
 But we especially, who had fixed οur hopes upon the Christ of God, had gladness kable, and a divine joy blossomed in the hearts of us as we beheld every place, which a short time re had beenlaid in ruinsby the tyrants' deeds,now reviving as if aftera long and deadly destruction,and temples rising once more from their foundations toa boundless height, and receiving in far greater measure the magnificence of those that formerly had been destroyed.
 Yea, and Emperors,the most exalted, by successive enacbnentson bahalf of the Christians, confirmed still further and more widely God's bounty towards us;
 and bishops constantly received even personal letters from the Emperor, and honours and gifts οf money.
 It may not be unfitting at the properplacein this work, as ona sacred monument, to insert in thisbook the textofthese documents, translated fromLatin into Greek, so that they may also be preserved in remembrance by all those who come after us.
 III.
 After this there was brought about that spectacle for which we all prayed and longed:
 festivals of dedication in the cities and consecrations οf the newly- built housesof prayer,assemblages of bishops, comings together of those from far off foreign lands, kindly actson the part of laity towards laity, union between the members οf Crist's body εἰς μίαν συνιόντων ἁρμονίαν ἕνωσις.
 συνήγετο γοῦν ἀκολούθως προρρήσει προφητικῇ μυστικῶς τὸ μέλλον προσημαινούσῃ ὀστέον πρὸς ὀστέον καὶ ἁρμονία πρὸς ἁρμονίαν καὶ δάα θεσπίζων ὁ λόγος δι’ αἰνιγμάτων ἀψευδῶς προανετείνατο, μία τε ἦν θείου πνεύματος διὰ πάντων τῶν μελῶν χωροῦσα δύναμις καὶ ψυχὴ τῶν πάντων μία καὶ προθυμία πίστεως ἢ αὐτὴ καὶ εἷς ἐξ ἁπάντων θεολογίας ὕμνος, ναὶ μὴν καὶ τῶν ἡγουμένων ἐντελεῖς θρησκεῖαι ἱερουργίαι τετ·
 ῶν ἱερωμένων καὶ θεοπρεπεῖς ἐκκλησίας θεσμοί, ὧδε μὲν ψαλμῳδίαις καὶ ταῖς λοιπαῖς τῶν θεόθεν ἡμῖν παραδοθεισῶν φωνῶν ἀκροάσεσιν, ὧδε δὲ θείαις καὶ μυστικαῖς ἐπιτελουμέναις διακονίαις, σωτηρίου τε ἢν πάθους ἀπόρρητα σύμβολα.
 ὁμοῦ δὲ πᾶν γένος ἡλικίας ἄρρενός τε καὶ θήλεος φύσεως ὅΛη διανοίας ἰσχύι δι’ εὐχῶν καὶ εὐχαριστίας γεγηθότι νῷ καὶ ψυχῇ τὸν τῶν ἀγαθῶν παραίτιον θεὸν ἐγέραιρον.
 Ἐκίνει δὲ καὶ λόγους ἅπας τῶν παρόντων ἀρχόντων πανηγυρικούς, ὡς ἑκάστῳ παρῆν δυνάμεως, θειάζων τὴν πανήγυριν, ΙV.
 καί τις ἐν μέσῳ παρελθὼν τῶν μετρίως ἐπιεικῶν, λόγου σύνταξιν πεποιημένος, ὡς ἐν ἐκκλησίας ἀθροίσματι, πλείστων ἐπιπαρόντων ποιμένων ἐν ἡσυχίᾳ καὶ κόσμῳ τὴν ἀκρόασιν παρεχομένων, ἑνὸς εἰς πρόσωπον τὰ πάντα ἀρίστου καὶ θεοφιλοῦς ἐπισκόπου, οὗ διὰ σπουδῆς ὁ μάλιστα τῶν ἀμφὶ τὸ Φοινίκων ἔθνος διαπρέπων ἐν Τύρῳ νεὼς φιλοτίμως ἐπεσκεύαστο, τοιόνδε παρέσχε λόγον.
 as they met togetherin complete harmony.
 Certainly in accordance with a prophetic prediction that mystically signified beforehand what wasforto come, there came together bone to bone and joint to joint, and all that the oracular utterance in dark speech truly foretold.
 One was the power of the divine Spirt that spread through all the members;
 all were of one soul, and displayed the same zeal for the faith;
 one hymn of praise to God came from the lips of all Yea verily our leaders conducted perfect ceremonies, and the consecrated priests pertonned the sacred rites and stately ordinances of the Church, here with psalmody and recitation of such other words as have been giveuus from God, there with the ministering of divine and mystic services;
 and the ineffable symbols of the Saviour's Ρassion were present.
 Αnd all together, of every age, male and female, with the whole power of their mind gave honour to God the Αuthor of their good fortune, in prayerandthanksgiving with joyful heartand soul.
 Moreover every one of the Church's rulers that were present, accorffingtohis ability,delivered panegyrical orations, inspiring the assembly.
 IV.
 Αnd a certain one of moderate parts1 advanced intothe midst, having composeda discourse;
 and, in the presence of very many pastors who gave it a quiet and orderly hearing as in a chureh assembly, he delivered the following oration, addressed personally toa single bishop who was in every respect most excellent and beloved of God,by whose zealand enthusiasm the temple in Tyre, surpassing in splendour all οthers in Phoenicia, had been erected:
 ΠΑΝΗΓΥΡlKOΣ ΕΠΙ TΗΙ TΩΝ ΕKKΑΗΣ1ΩΝ ΟΙΚΟΔΟΜΗΙ ΠΑΥΑΙΝΩΙ ΤΥΡΙΩΝ ΕΠΙΣΚΟΠΩΙ ΠΡΟΣΠΕΦΩΝΗΜΕΝΟΣ“ Ὦ φίλοι θεοῦ καὶ ἱερεῖς οἱ τὸν ἅγιον ποδήρη καὶ τὸν οὐράνιον τῆς δόξης ατέφανον τό τε χρῖαμα τὸ ἔνθεον καὶ τὴν ἱερατικὴν τοῦ ἁγίου πνεύματος στoλὴν περιβεβλημένοι, σύ τε, ὦ νέον ἁγίου νεὼ θεοῦ σεμνολόγημα, γεραιρᾷ μὲν φρονήαει παρὰ θεοῦ τετιμημένε, νέας δὲ καὶ ἀκμαζούσης ἀρετῆς ἔργα πολυτελῆ καὶ πράξεις ἐπιδεδειγμένε, ᾧ τὸν ἐπὶ γῆς οἶκον αὐτὸς ὁ τὸν αύμπαντα κόσμον περιέχων θεὸς δείμασθαι καὶ ἀνανεοῦν Χριατῷ τῷ μονογενεῖ καὶ πρωτογενεῖ δὲ αὐτοῦ λόγῳ τῆ τε ἁγίᾳ τούτου καὶ θεοπρεπεῖ νύμφη γέρας ἐξαίρετον δεδώρηται, εἴτε τις νέον σε Bεσελεηλ θείας ἀρχιτέκτονα ακηνῆς ἐθέλοι καλεῖν εἴτε Σολομῶνα καινῆς καὶ πολὺ κρείττονος Ἱερουσαλὴμ βασιλέα εἴτε καὶ νέον Ζοροβάβελ τὴν πολὺ κρείττονα δόξαν τῆς προτέρας τῷ νεῷ τοῦ θεοῦ περιτιθέντα, ἀλλὰ καὶ ὑμεῖς, ὦ τῆς ἱερᾶς ἀγέλης Χριατοῦ θρέμματα, λόγων ἀγαθῶν ἑατία, αωφροσύνης παιδευτήριον καὶ θεοσεβείας σεμνὸν καὶ θεοφιλὲς ἀκροατήριον·
 πάλαι μὲν ἡμῖν τὰς παραδόξους θεοσημίας καὶ 5 τῶν τοῦ κυρίου θαυμάτων τὰς εἰς ἀνθρώπους εὐεργεσίας διὰ θείων ἀναγνωσμάτων ἀκοῇ παραδεχομένοις ὕμνους εἰς θεὸν καὶ ᾠδὰς ἀναπέμπειν ἐξῆν λέγειν παιδευομένοις ὁ θεός, ἐν τοῖς ὠσὶν ἡμῶν ἠκούσαμεν, οἱ πατέρες ἡμῶν ἀνήγγειλαν ἡμῖν ἔργον δ᾿ εἰργάσω ἐν ταῖς ἡμέραις αὐτῶν, ἐν ἡμέραις ἀρχαίαις᾿·
 ἀλλὰ νῦν γε οὐκέτ᾿ ἀκοαῖς οὐδὲ λόγων φήμαις τὸν βραχίονα τὸν ὑφηλὸν τήν τε Panegyric onthe building of the churches, addressed to Paulinus, bishop ofthe Tyrians:
“Ο friends of God and priests who are clothed with the holy robe1 and the celestialcrown of glory, the divine unction and the Ρriestly garb of the Holy Spirit;
 and thou,Ο youthful pride of God 's holy temple, honoured indeed by Godwithrevered wisdom, yet noted for the choiee deeds and acts ofa youthful virtue that cometh to its prime, upon whom Ηe who compasseth the whole world hath bestowed the especial honour of building Ηis house upon earth, and restoring it for Christ Ηis only- begotten firstborn Word and for Christ 's holy and reverend Bride- whether one should call theea new the architeet ofa divine tabernacle, or Solomon the king of anew andfar goodlier Jerusalem, or evenanew Zerubbabel who bestowed upon the temple of God that glory which greatly exceeded the former;
 and you also, ye nurslingsof the sacredflockof Christ,– placeof goodly words, schoolof sobriety, auditory of godliness grave and dear to God:
 Long ago, as we listened to the reading aloud of those passages of Holy Writ which told of the miraculous signs that God gave and the wondrous deebs that the Lord wrought for the serviee of men we could hymns and songs to God and say, even as we were taught:
‘ We have heardwith our ears,Ο God, our fathers have told us, what workthou didst in their days, in the days of old.’
 But now indeedno longer by hearing orby report dowe learn of the stretched out arm and the heavenly right hand of οὐράνιον δεξιὰν τοῦ παναγάθου καὶ παμβασιλέως ἡμῶν θεοῦ παραλαμβάνουσιν, ἔργοις δ’ ὡς ἔπος εἰπεῖν καὶ αὐτοῖς ὀφθαλμοῖς τὰ πάλαι μνήμη παραδεδομένα πιστὰ καὶ ἀληθῆ καθορωμένοις, δεύτερον ὕμνον ἐπινίκιον πάρεστιν ἀναμέλπειν ἐναρ- γῶς τε ἀναφωνεῖν καὶ λέγεινἴ’ καθάπερ ἠκούσαμεν, οὕτως καὶ εἴδομεν ἐν πόλει κυρίου τῶν δυνάμεων, ἐν πόλει τοῦ θεοῦ ἡμῶν. ’
 ποίᾳ δὲ πόλει ἢ τῇδε τῇ νεοπαγεῖ καὶ θεοτεύκτῳ;
 ἥτις ἐστὶν ἐκκλησία θεοῦ ζῶντος, στῦλος καὶ ἑδραίωμα τῆς ἀληθείας, περὶ ἧς καὶ ἄλλο τι θεῖον λόγιον ὧδέ πως εὐαγγελίζεται‘ δεδοξασμένα ἐλαλήθη περὶ ἀοῦ, ἡ πόλις τοῦ θεοῦ’·
 ἐΦ᾿ ἣν τοῦ παναγάθου συγκροτήσαντος ἡμᾶς θεοῦ διὰ τῆς τοῦ μονογενοῦς αὐτοῦ χάριτος, τῶν ἀνακεκλημένων ἕκαστος ὑμνείτω μόνον οὐχὶ βοῶν καὶ λέγων εὐφράνθην ἐπὶ τοῖς εἰρηκόσιν μοι Εἰς οἶκον κυρίου πορευσόμεθα᾿ καὶ κύριε, ἠγάπησα εὐπρέπειαν οἴκου ἀοῦ καὶ τόπον σκηνώματος δόξης σου,᾿ καὶ μὴ μόνον γε ὁ καθεῖς, ἀλλὰ καὶ οἱ πάντες ἀθρόως ἑνὶ πνεύματι καὶ μιᾷ ψυχῇ γεραίροντες ἀνευφημῶμεν, μέγας κύριος ἐπιλέγοντες‘ καὶ αἰνετὸς σφόδρα ἐν πόλει τοῦ θεοῦ ἡμῶν, ἐν ὄρει ἁγίῳ αὐτοῦ.’
 καὶ γὰρ οὗν μέγας ὡς ἀληθῶς, καὶ μέγας ὁ οἶκος αὐτοῦ, ὑψηλὸς καὶ ἐπιμήκης καὶ ὡραῖος κάλλει παρὰ τοὺς υἱοὺς τῶν ἀνθρώπων·
 μέγας κύριος ὁ ποιῶν θαυμάσια μόνος·
 μέγας ὁ ποιῶν μεγάλα καὶ ἀνεξιχνίαστα ἔνδοξά τε καὶ ἐξαίσια, ὧν οὐκ ἔστιν ἀριθμός·
 μέγας ὁ ἀλλοιῶν καιροὺς καὶ χρόνους, μεθιστῶν βασιλεῖς καὶ καθιστῶν, ἐγείρων ἀπὸ γῆς πτωχὸν καὶ κοπρίας ἀνιστῶν πένητα.
 καθεῖλεν δυνάστας ἀπὸ θρόνων, καὶ ὕψωσεν ταπεινοὺς ἀπὸ γῆς·
 πεινῶντας οur all-gracious God and universal King;
 nay, deeds, as onemight say, and with our very eyes do we behold that those things committed to memory long ago are faithful and true;
 and so we can singa second hymn οf victory, and raise our voices aloud and say:
‘ As we haveheard, so havewe seen in the city of the Lord of hosts, in the city οf οur God.’
 Αnd in what city, if it benot the new- made city thatGod hath builded, which is the chureh ofthe living God, the pillar and ground of the truth;
 οf also another divine oracle speaketh good tidings, somewhat on this manner:
‘ Glorious things are spoken of thee,O city οf God’? To which city since the all- gracious Godhath gathered us, through the grace of Ηis Only- begotten,let each ofthe sing, yea all but shout, and say‘Iwas glad when theysaid unto me,we will go unto the house οf the Lord’;
 Lord’;
 and‘ LordIhave loved the beauty house, and the place where thy glory dwelleth.’
 Αnd let not οnly eachoneby himself,but also all together with οne spiritandone soul, give honour and praise, saying:
‘ Great istheLord, and highly to be praised, in the city of οur God, in his holy’.
 Yea verily, Ηe is truly great, and great is Ηis house, lofty and large;
 and more lovely in beauty than the sons of men.
 Great is the Lord who only doeth wondrous things.
 Great is Ηe who doeth great things and past finding out;
 yea, glorious andmarvellous things of which there is no number.
 Great is Ηe who changeth the times and the seasons, removing kings and setting them up, raising up the poor from the ground, and from the dunghill setting up the needy.
 Ηe hath put down princes from their thrones, and hath exalted them of low degree from the ἐνέπλησεν ἀγαθῶν, καὶ βραχίονας ὑπερηφάνων συνέτριψεν, οὐ πιστοῖς μόνον, ἀλλὰ καὶ ἀπίστοις τῶν παλαιῶν διηγημάτων τὴν μνήμην πιστωσάμενος, ὁ θαυματουργός, ὁ μεγαλουργός, ὁ τῶν ὅλων δεσπότης, ὁ τοῦ σύμπαντος κόσμου ὁ παντοκράτωρ, ὁ πανάγαθος, ὁ εἷς καὶ μόνος θεός, ᾧ τὸ καινὸν ᾆσμα μέλπωμεν προσυπακούοντες‘ τῷ ποιοῦντι θαυμάσια μόνῳ, ὅτι εἰς τὸν αἰῶνα τὸ ἔλεος αὐτοῦ·
 τῷ πατάξαντι βασιλεῖς μεγάλους καὶ ἀποκτείναντι βασιλεῖς κραταιούς, ὅτι εἰς τὸν αἰῶνα τὸ ἔλεος αὐτοῦ·
 ὅτι ἐν τῆ ταπεινώσει ἡμῶν ἐμνήσθη ἡμῶν καὶ ἐλυτρώσατο ἡμᾶς ἐκ τῶν ἐχθρῶν ἡμῶν.’
” καὶ τὸν μὲν τῶν ὅλων πατέρα τούτοις ἀνευφημοῦντες μή ποτε διαλείποιμεν·
 τὸν δὲ τῶν ἀγαθῶν ἡμῖν δεύτερον αἴτιον, τὸν τῆς θεογνωσίας εἰσηγητήν, τὸν τῆς ἀληθοῦς εὐσεβείας διδάσκαλον, τὸν τῶν ἀσεβῶν ὀλετῆρα, τὸν τυπαννοκτόνον, τὸν τοῦ βίου διορθωτήν, τὸν ἡμῶν τῶν ἀπεγνωσμένων σωτῆρα Ἰησοῦν ἀνὰ στόμα φέροντες γεραίρωμεν, ὅτι δὴ μόνος, οἷα παναγάθου πατρὸς μονώτατος ὑπάρχων πανάγαθος παῖς, γνώμη τῆς πατρικῆς φιλανθρωπίας τῶν ἐν φθορᾷ κάτω που κειμένων ἡμῶν εὖ μάλα προθύμως ὑποδὺς τὴν φύσιν, οἶά τις ἰατρῶν ἄριστος τῆς τῶν καμνόντων ἕνεκεν αωτηρίας ὁρῇ μὲν δεινά, θιγγάνειδ’ ἀηδέων ἐπ’ ἀλλοτρίῃσί τε ξυμφορῇσιν ἰδίας καρποῦται λύπας,’ οὐ νοσοῦντας αὐτὸ μόνον οὐδ’ ἕλκεσι δεινοῖς καὶ σεσηπόσιν ἤδη τραύμασιν πιεζομένους, ἀλλὰ καὶ ἐν νεκροῖς κειμένους ἡμᾶς ἐξ αὐτῶν μυχῶν τοῦ θανάτου αὐτὸς ἑαυτῷ διεσώσατο, ὅτι ground.
 The hungry he hath filled with good things, and he hath broken the arms of the proud.
 since, therefore,Ηe hath confirmed not only for the faithful but also for the faithless the record of the ancient narratives, even Ηe, the Doerof wonders, the Doerof great things, the Lordof the universe, the Μakerofthe whole world, the Αlmighty, the All- gracious, the one and only— let us sing to Ηim the new song, supplying in thought this also :
‘ To himwhoalone doeth great wonders:
 for his mercy endureth for ever.
.
.
 to him whichsmote great kings,.
.
.
 and slew mighty kings;
 for his mercy endureth for ever.
.
.
 for he remembered us in our low estate,.
.
.
 and hath delivered us from our adversaries. ’
“ Αnd may we never cease to praise aloud in these Words the Father οf the universe.
 But as for Him who is the second cause of our good things, Who broughtmen to theknowledgeof God, the Teacherof true piety, the Destroyerof the wicked, the Slayerof tyrants, the Εmenderοf human life, our saviourwhenwe were in despair, even Jesus, let us honourΗisname upon our lips;
 for Ηe alone, as beingthe οne only, all- gracious Sonofan all- gracious sincethe Father inHis love formanso ordained it, right willingly put οn the natureof us, even of those who anywhere lay low in corruption.
 And like some excellent physician, who, to save those who are sick,‘ though he sees the ills yet touches the foul spots, and for another's misfortunes reapssufferingfor himself,’ 1 so Ηe by Ηimself saved the very abyss of death us who were not merely sick or oppressed by grievous sores and wounds already putrifying, but even lying among the dead;
 for none μηδ’ ἄλλῳ τῳ τῶν κατ’ οὐρανὸν τοσοῦτον παρῆν ἰσχύος, ὡς τῆ τῶν τοσούτων ἀβλαβῶς διακονήσασθαι σωτηρίᾳ.
 μόνος δ’ οὗν καὶ τῆς ἡμῶν αὐτῶν βαρυπαθοῦς φθορᾶς ἐφαψάμενος, μόνος τοὺς ἡμετέρους ἀνατλὰς πόνους, μόνος τὰ πρόστιμα τῶν ἡμετέρων ἡμιθνῆτας, ἀλλὰ καὶ πάμπαν ἐν μνήμασι καὶ τάφοις μυσαροὺς ἤδη καὶ ὀδωδότας ἀναλαβὼν πάλαι τε καὶ νῦν σπουδῇ τῇ φιλανθρώπῳ παρὰ πᾶσαν τὴν οὗτινος οὖν ἡμῶν τε αὐτῶν ἐλπίδα σῴζει τε καὶ τῶν τοῦ πατρὸς ἀγαθῶν ἀφθονίαν μεταδίδωσιν, ὁ ζωοποιός, ὁ φωταγωγός, ὁ μέγας ἡμῶν ἰατρὸς καὶ βασιλεὺς καὶ κύριος, ὁ Χριστὸς τοῦ θεοῦ.
 ἀλλὰ τότε μὲν ἅπαξ ἐν νυκτὶ ζοφερᾷ καὶ σκότῳ βαθεῖ δαιμόνων ἀλιτηρίων πλάνῃ καἰ θεομισῶν πνευμάτων ἐνεργείαις πᾶν τὸ τῶν ἀνθρώπων γένος κατορωρυγμένον<ὁρῶν> αὐτὸ ἐπιφανείς, ὡς ἂν κηροῦ διατακέντος ταῖς αὐτοῦ βολαῖς τοῦ φωτός, τὰς πολυδέτους τῶν τῶν ἀσεβημάτων ἡμῶν σειρὰς διελύσατο.
“ Νῦν δ’ ἐπὶ τῇ τοσαύτη χάριτι καὶ εὐεργεσίᾳ τοῦ μισοκάλου φθόνου καὶ φιλοπονήρου δαίμονος μόνον οὐχὶ διαρρηγνυμένου καὶ πάσας αὐτοῦ τὰς θανατοποιοὺς καθ’ ἡμῶν ἐπιστρατεύοντος δυνάμεις καὶ τὰ μὲν πρῶτα κυνὸς δίχην λυττῶντος τοὺς ὀδόντας ἐπὶ τοὺς ἀφιεμένους κατ’ αὐτοῦ λίθους προσαράττοντος καὶ τὸν κατὰ τῶν ἀμυνομένων θυμὸν ἐπὶ τὰ ἄψυχα βλήματα καθιέντος, τοῖς τῶν λίθοις καὶ ταῖς τῶν οἴκων ἀψύχοις ὕλαις τὴν θηριώδη μανίαν ἐπερείσαντος ἐρημίαν τε, ὥς γε δὴ αὐτὸς ἑαυτῷ ᾤετο, τῶν ἐκκλησιῶν ἀπεργασαμένου, εἶτα δὲ δεινὰ συρίγματα καὶ τὰς other in heaven possessed such strength as to minister unscathed for the salvation of so many.
 Ηe, then, it was who alone laid hold upon the grievous sufferingof οur corruption, alone endured our sorrows, alone took upon Himself the penalty for our wickednesses;
 and when we were,I will not say, half dead, but even by this time altogether foul and stinking in tombs and graves, Ηe raised us up, and saveth us now as inthe days ofold, in Ηis earnest love for man, beyond the hope of anyone, even οf ourselves, and the good things of Ηis Father imparteth to us freelya share— Ηe who is the Giver of life the Enlightener, our great Physician and King and Lord, the Christ of God.
 Yea at that time, when Ηe beheld1the whole human raee lring sunk in gloomy night and daxkness profound through the deceit of baneful demons and the operations of God- hating spirits, by naught save Ηis appearing Ηe broke asunder once for all the many- fettered chainsof our wickednesses, as wax is melted by the rays of Ηis light.
“ Αnd when at this great graceand benefaction theenvy thathateththe good, even the demon that loveth the evil, was tornasunder with wrath,so to speak, and was marshalling all his death- dealing forces against us, at first raging likea dog which gnawethwith his teeth at the stone hurled at him and ventethonthe lifeless missiles hls fury agamst those who would drive him away, he ffirected his ferocious madness against the stones of the houses οf prayer and the lifeless materials of which the buildings were composed, to work( as at leasthe thought within himself) the ruin οf the churches;
 then he emitted his dread hissings and serpent- like sounds, at ὀφιώδεις αὐτοῦ φωνὰς τοτὲ μὲν ἀσεβῶν τυράννων ἀπειλαῖς, τοτὲ δὲ βλασφήμοις δυσσεβῶν ἀρχόντων διατάξεσιν ἀφιέντος καὶ προσέτι τὸν αὐτοῦ θάνατον ἐξερευγομένου καὶ τοῖς ἰώδεσι καὶ ψυχοφθόροις δηλητηρίοις τὰς ἁλισκομένας πρὸς αὐτοῦ φυχὰς φαρμάττοντος καὶ μόνον οὐχὶ νεκροῦντος ταῖς τῶν νεκρῶν εἰδώλων νεκροποιοῖς θυσίαις πάντα τε ἀνθρωπόμορφον θῆρα καὶ πάντα τρόπον ἄγριον καθ’ ἡμῶν ὑποσαλεύοντος, αὗθις ἐξ ὑπαρχῆς ὁ τῆς μεγάλης βουλῆς ἄγγελος, ὁ μέγας ἀρχιστράτηγος τοῦ θεοῦ, μετὰ τὴν αὐτάρκη διαγυμνασίαν ἢν οἱ μέγιστοι τῆς αὐτοῦ βασιλείας στρατιῶται διὰ τῆς πρὸς ἅπαντα ὑπομονῆς καὶ καρτερίας ἐνεδείξαντο, ἀθρόως οὕτως φανείς, τὰ μὲν ἐχθρὰ καὶ πολέμια εἰς ἀφανὲς καὶ τὸ μηθὲν κατεστήσατο, ὡς μηδὲ πώποτε ὠνομάσθαι δοκεῖν, τὰδ’ αὐτῷ φίλα καὶ οἰκεῖα δόξης ἐπέκεινα παρὰ πᾶσιν, οὐκ ἀνθρώποις μόνον, ἀλλ’ ἤδη καὶ δυνάμεσιν οὐρανίοις ἡλίῳ τε καὶ σελήνῃ καὶ ἄστροις καὶ τῷ σύμπαντι οὐρανῷ τε καὶ κόσμῳ προήγαγεν, ὥστε ἤδη, ὃ μηδὲ ἄλλοτέ πω, τοὺς πάντων ἀνωτάτω βασιλέας ἧς λελόγχασι παρ’ αὐτοῦ τιμῆς συνῃσθημένως νεκρῶν μὲν εἰδώλων καταπτύειν προσώποις, πατεῖν δ’ ἄθεσμα δαιμόνων θέσμια καὶ παλαιᾶς ἀπάτης πατροπαραδότου καταγελᾶν, ἕνα δὲ αὐτὸν μόνον θεὸν τὸν κοινὸν ἁπάντων καὶ ἑαυτῶν εὐεργέτην γνωρίζειν χριστόν τε τοῦ θεοῦ παῖδα παμβασιλέα τῶν ὅλων ὁμολογεῖν σωτῆρά τε αὐτὸν ἐν στήλαις ἀνσγορεύειν, ἀνεξαλείπτῳ μνήμῃ τὰ κατορθώματα καὶ τὰς κατὰ τῶν ἀσεβῶν αὐτοῦ νίκας μέση τῇ βασιλευούσῃ τῶν ἐπὶ γῆς πόλει βασιλικοῖς Χαρακτῆρσι προσεγγράφοντας, ὥστε μόνον τῶν ἐξ αἰῶνος Ἰησοῦν οne time by the threatsof wicked tyrants, at anotherbyblasphemous ordinances of impious rulers;
 yea further, he vomited forth the death that was his, and bewitched the souh he captured by his baneful and soul- destroying poisons, all but causing their death by his death- fraught sacrifices to dead idols, and secretly stirring up every wild beast in shape of man, and every kind of savage thing, agriaInst us.
 But now, now againoncemore the Αngelof mighty counsel, the great captain of the host of God, after that the greatest soldiers in Ηis kingdom had given sufficient proof of their full training by their endurance and stedfastness in all things, by naughtsaveHis sudden apearing causedto vanish into nothingness whatsoever wasadverse and hostile, so that it seemed never to have had evena name;
 howbeit, whatsoever was friendly and dear to Him, that Ηe advanced beyond all glory in the sightof all, not only of men, but even also οf the powersof heaven,the sun and moon and stars, and of the whole heaven and earth;
 so that now—a thing unknown heretofore— the most Emperorsof all, conscious of the honour which they have received nom Him, spit upon the faces οf dead idoh, traInple upon the unhallowed rites οf deomons, and laugh attheold deceits they inherited from their fathers:
 but Him who is the common Benefactor of all andof themselves they recognize as the one and only God, and confess that christ the son οf God is sovereign King ofthe universe,and style Him as Saviour on monuments, inseribing in an imperishable record Ηis righteous acts and His victories over the impious ones, in imperial characters in the midst of the city that is Empress among the cities of the world.
 Χριστὸν τὸν ἡμῶν σωτῆρα καὶ πρὸς αὐτῶν τῶν ἐπὶ γῆς ἀνωτάτω οὐχ οἷα κοινὸν ἐξ ἀνθρώπων βασιλέα γενόμενον ὁμολογεῖσθαι, ἀλλ’ οἷα τοῦ καθ’ ὅλων θεοῦ παῖδα γνήσιον καὶ αὐτὸν θεὸν προσκυνεῖσθαι.
“ Καὶ εἰκότως·
 τίς γὰρ τῶν πώποτε βασιλέων τοσοῦτον ἀρετῆς ἠνέγκατο, ὡς πάντων τῶν ἐπὶ γῆς ἀνθρώπων ἀκοὴν καὶ γλῶτταν ἐμπλῆσαι τῆς αὐτοῦ προσηγορίας;
 τίς βασιλεὺς νόμους εὐσεβεῖς οὕτω καὶ σώφρονας διαταξάμενος ἀπὸ περάτων γῆς καὶ εἰς ἄκρα τῆς ὅλης οἰκουμένης εἰς ἐπήκοον ἅπασιν ἀνθρώποις ἀναγινώσκεσθαι διαρκῶς ἐκράτυνεν;
 τίς ἀνημέρων ἐθνῶν ἔθη βάρβαρα καὶ ἀνήμερα τοῖς ἡμέροις αὐτοῦ καὶ φιλανθρωποτάτοις παρέυσε νόμοις;
 τίς αἰῶσιν ὅλοις ὑπὸ πάντων πολεμούμενος τὴν ὑπὲρ ἄνθρωπον ἀρετὴν ἐπεδείξατο, ὡς ἀνθεῖν ὁσημέραι καὶ νεάζειν διὰ παντὸς τοῦ βίου;
 τίς ἔθνος τὸ μηδὲ ἀκουσθὲν ἐξ αἰῶνος οὐκ ἐν γωνίᾳ ποι γῆς λεληθός, ἀλλὰ καθ’ ὅλης τῆς ὑφ’ ἥλιον ἱδρύσατο;
 τίς εὐσεβείας ὅπλοις οὕτως ἐφράξατο τοὺς στρατιώτας, ὡς ἀδάμαντος τὰς φυχὰς κραταιοτέρους ἐν τοῖς πρὸς τοὺς ἀντιπάλους ἀγῶσιν διαφαίνεσθαι;
 τίς βασιλέων ἐς τοσοῦτον κρατεῖ καὶ στρατηγεῖ μετὰ θάνατον καὶ τρόπαια κατ’ ἐχθρῶν ἵστησιν καὶ πάντα τόπον καὶ χώραν καὶ πόλιν, Ἑλλάδα τε καὶ βάρβαρον, βασιλικῶν οἴκων αὐτοῦ πληροῖ καὶ θείων ναῶν ἀφιερώμασιν, οἷα τάδε τὰ τοῦδε τοῦ νεὼ περικαλλῆ κοσμήματά τε καὶ ἀναθήματα;
 ἃ καὶ αὐτὰ σεμνὰ μὲν ὡς ἀληθῶς καὶ μεγάλα ἐκπλήξεως τε καὶ θαύματος ἄξια καὶ οἷα τῆς τοῦ σωτῆρος ἡμῶν βασιλείας ἐναργῆ δείγματα, ὅτι καὶ νῦν αὐτὸς εἶπεν καὶ ἐγενήθησαν, αὐτὸς ἐνετείλατο καὶ ἐκτίσθησαν Thus Jesus Christour Saviour, alone of those whohave ever been,is acknowledged, even by the most exaltedon the earth, not as an ordinary king taken from among men, but is worshipped as the very son of the God οf the universe, and as Ηimself God.
“ Αnd rightlyso.
 For what king ever attainedtoso much virtue as to ml the earsand tongues of all mankind upon earth with his name 7.
 what king, when hehadlaid down lawssogood and wise, Was powerful enoughto cause them to be published from the ends of the earth and too the bounds οf the whole world in the hearing of all mankind? who abolished the barbarous and uncivilized customs of uncivilized nations by his civilized and most humane laws? Who,when warredonby all menforwhole ages, gave such proof of superhuman might as to flourish daily and remain young throughout his entire life? Who establisheda nation never even heard οf since time hegan, which now lieth not hidden in some obscure corner οf the earth but extendeth wherever the sun shineth? Who so defended his soldiers with the weapons of piety that their souls proved harder than adamant when they contended with their adversaries? Which of the king exerciseth so greata sway, taketh the Reld after death, triumpheth οver enemies, and filleth every plaee and district and city, both Greekand barbarian, with votive offerings οf his royal houses and divine temples, such as the fair ornaments and offerings that we see in this temple? Truly venerable and great are these Same things, worthy οf amazement and wonder, and in themselves clear proofs of the sovereignty of οur saviour:
 for even now Ηe spake, and they were made;
 Ηe τίσθησαν τί γὰρ καὶ ἔμελλεν τοῦ παμβασιλέως καὶ πανηγμόνος καὶ αὐτοῦ θεοῦ λόγου ἐνστήσεσθαι τῷ νεύματι;
), οχολῆς τε λόγων οἰκείας εἰς ἀκριβῆ θεωρίαν τε καὶ ἑρμηνείαν τυγχάνει δεόμενα·
 οὐ μὴν δάα καὶ οἷα τὰ τῆς τῶν πεπονηκότων προθυμίας κέκριται παρ’ αὐτῷ τῷ θεολογουμένῳ τὸν ἔμψυχον πάντων ὑμῶν καθορῶντι ναὸν καὶ τὸν ἐκ ζώντων λίθων καὶ βεβηκότων οἶκον ἐποπτεύοντι εὗ καὶ ἀσφαλῶς ἱδρυμένον ἐπὶ τῷ θεμελίῳ τῶν ἀποστόλων καὶ προφητῶν, ὄντος ἀκρογωνιαίου λίθου αὐτοῦ Ἰησοῦ Χριστοῦ, ὃν ἀπεδοκίμασαν μὲν οὐχ οἱ τῆς παλαιᾶς καὶ μηκέτ’ οὔσης ἐκείνης μόνον, ἀλλὰ καὶ τῆς εἰς ἔτι νῦν τῶν πολλῶν ἀνθρώπων οἰκοδομῆς κακοὶ κακῶν ὄντες ἀρχιτέκτονες, δοκιμάσας δ’ ὁ πατὴρ καὶ τότε καὶ νῦν εἰς κεφαλὴν γωνίας τῆσδε τῆς κοινῆς ἡμῶν ἐκκλησίας ἱδρύσατο.
 τοῦτον δὴ οὖν τὸν ἐξ ὑμῶν αὐτῶν ἐπεσκευασμένον ζῶντος θεοῦ ζῶντα ναόν, τὸ μέγιστον καὶ ἀληθεῖ λόγῳ θεοπρεπὲς ἱερεῖόν φημι, οὗ τὰ ἐνδοτάτω ἄδυτα τοῖς πολλοῖς ἀθεώρητα καὶ ὄντως ἅγια καὶ τῶν ἁγίων ἅγια, τίς ἂν ἐποπτεύσας ἐξειπεῖν τολμήσειεν;
 τίς δὲ κάν εἰσκύψαι περιβόλων ἱερῶν εἴσω δυνατός, ὅτι μὴ μόνος ὁ μέγας τῶν ὅλων ἀρχιερεύς, ᾧ μόνῳ θέμις πάσης λογικῆς ψυχῆς τὰ ἀπόρρητα διερευνᾶσθαι;
 τάχα δὲ καὶ ἄλλῳ ἄλλῳ δευτερεύειν μετὰ τοῦτον ἑνὶ μόνῳ τῶν ἴσων ἐφικτόν, τῷδε τῷ προκαθημένῳ τῆσδε τῆς στρατιᾶς ἡγεμόνι, ὃν αὐτὸς ὁ πρῶτος καὶ μέγας ἀρχιερεὺς δευτερείοις τῶν τῇδε ἱερείων τιμήσας, ποιμένα τῆς ὑμετέρας commanded, and they were created:
 for what could resist the will of the universalKing and Rulerandthe Word of God Himself? Such things would requirea discourse of their own were one carefully to exmaine and expound them at leisure.
 Υet indeed the zeal of those who have laboured is not so great orso noble in the judgementof Him whom we address as God, when Ηe looketh into the lively temple whichwe all compose, and vieweth the house formed of living and firmly set stones, well and securely grounded upon the foundation of the apostles and prophets, Jesus Christ himself being the chief corner- stone;
 which stone the master– builders rejected, not onlyof that old buildingwhichis no more,but also of that buildingwhich compriseth the more part of mankind to the present day, evil workmen as they were of evil things;
 but the Father approved it, and then and now builded it into the head of the corner of this our common Church.
 This living temple, then,of a livingGod Formed out of ourselves,Ι mean the greatest sanctuary and truly reverend, whose innermost shrine may noit be seen by the common eye, for verily holy it is and a holy οf— who that viewed it would dare to describe? Who is able even to peer into the temple buildings that surround it, save only the great High Priest of the universe, to whom alone it is peimitted to search the hidden mysteries of every rational soul But perehance it is possible for another also, and for one alone among equals, to take the second place after Ηim, namely,for the commander who presideth over this army, whom the first and great High Priest Himself hath honoured with the second place in the priestly ministries of thhis place, the pastor of your ἐνθέου ποίμνης κλήρῳ καὶ κρίσει τοῦ πατρὸς τὸν ὑμέτερον λαχόντα λαόν, ὡς ἂν θεραπευτὴν καὶ ὑποφήτην αὐτὸς ἑαυτοῦ κατετάξατο, τὸν νέον Ἀαρὼν ἢ Μελχισεδεκ ἀφωμοιωμένον τῷ υἱῷ τοῦ θεοῦ μένοντά τε καὶ πρὸς αὐτοῦ τηρούμενον εἰς τὸ διηνεκὲς ταῖς κοιναῖς ἁπάντων ἡμῶν εὐχαῖς.
 τούτῳ δὴ οὖν ἐξέστω μόνῳ μετὰ τὸν πρῶτον καὶ μέγιστον ἀρχιερέα, εἰ μὴ τὰ πρῶτα, τὰ δεύτερα γοῦν ὅμως ὁρᾶν τε καὶ ἐπισκοπεῖν τῆς ἐνδοτάτω τῶν ὑμετέρων φυχῶν θεωρίας, πείρᾳ μὲν καὶ χρόνου μήκει ἕκαστον ἀκριβῶς ἐξητακότι σπουδῇ τε τῆ αὐτοῦ καὶ ἐπιμελείᾳ τοὺς πάντας ὑμᾶς ἐν κόσμῳ καὶ λόγῳ τῷ κατ’ εὐσέβειαν διατεθειμένῳ δυνατῷ τε ὄντι μᾶλλον ἁπάντων, ὧν αὐτὸς σὺν θείᾳ δυνάμει κατηρτίσατο, τούτων τοῖς ἔργοις ἐφαμίλλως ἀποδοῦναι τοὺς λόγους.
 “ Ὁ μὲν οὖν πρῶτος καὶ μέγας ἡμῶν ἀρχιερεὺς ὅσα βλέπει τὸν πατέρα ποιοῦντα, ταῦτα, φησίν, ὁμοίως καὶ ὁ υἱὸς ποιεῖ·
 ὃ δὲ καὶ αὐτὸς ὡς ἄν ἐπὶ διδάσκαλον τὸν πρῶτον καθαροῖς νοὸς ὄμμασιν ἀφορῶν, ὅσα βλέπει ποιοῦντα, ὡς ἂν ἀρχετύποις χρώμενος παραδείγμασιν, τούτων τὰς εἰκόνας, ὡς ἔνι μάλιστα δυνατόν, εἰς τὸ ὁμοιότατον δημιουργῶν ἀπειργάσατο, οὐδὲν ἐκείνω καταλιπὼν τῶ Βεσελεηλ, ὃν αὐτὸς ὁ θεὸς πνεύματος ἐμπλήσας σοφίας καὶ συνέσεως καὶ τῆς ἄλλης ἐντέχνου καὶ ἔπι.
 γνώσεως, τῆς τῶν οὐρανίων τύπων διὰ συμβόλων ναοῦ κατασκευῆς δημιουργὸν ταύτῃδ’ οὖν καὶ ὅδε Χριστὸν ὅλον, τὸν λόγον, τὴν σοφίαν, τὸ φῶς ἐν τῇ αὐτὸς αὐτοῦ ἀγαλματοφορῶν ψυχῇ, οὐδ’ ἔστιν εἰπεῖν οἵᾳ divine flock who was allotted and adjudged your people by the Father, as Ηe Ηimselfhad appointed him Ηisattendantand interpreter, the new Αaron οr Melchizedek, made like unto the Son οf God, abiding and kept by Ηim continually by the common prayers of you all.
 To him, therefore,let itbe permitted alone, after the first and greatest High Priest, if notinthe first at any rateinthe second place, to behold and inspect the inmost recesses of your souh;
 since through experience and length of time1 he hath proved eaeh one and and his his zealous care he hath disposed you all in a godly order and doctrine;
 and he best of all is able to give such an account as will match his deedS, of those things that he himself hath wrought by the power οf God.
“ Νow our first and great Ηigh Priest saith that whatsoever thingshe seeth the Father doing, these the son also doeth in like manner.
 Αnd this one also, looking unto the nrst as unto a master with the pure eyesof the mind, whatsoever he seeth Ηim doing, these he useth as patterns and archetypes, and by his worbnanship hath wTought their images, as far as in him lieth, into the closest likeness;
 thus in no wise doth he comebehind that Bezalel, whom God Himself filled with the spirit of wisdom and understanding and with the knowledge as well of crafts and sciences, and called him to bethe workman that should constructthe temple of heavenly types in symbolic fashion.
 After this manner, then,this man also, bearing in his own soul the image of Christ entire, the Word, the Wisdom, the Light, μεγαλοφροσύνῃ πλουσίᾳ τε καὶ ἀπλήστῳ διανοίας χειρὶ καὶ οὺν οἵᾳ πάντων ὑμῶν φιλοτιμίᾳ, τῆ τῶν εἰσφορῶν μεγαλοψυχίᾳ τῆς αὐτῆς αὐτῷ προθέσεως κατὰ μηδένα τρόπον ἀπολειφθῆναι φιλονεικότερον μεγαλοφρονουμένων, τὸν μεγαλοπρεπῆ τόνδε θεοῦ τοῦ ὑψίστου νεὼν τῷ τοῦ κρείττονος παραδείγματι, ὡς ἂν ὁρώμενον μὴ ὁρωμένου, τὴν φύσιν ἐμφερῆ συνεστήσατο, χῶρον μὲν τόνδε, ὅ τι καὶ ἄξιον εἰπεῖν πρῶτον ἁπάντων, πάσης οὐ καθαρᾶς ὕλης ἐχθρῶν ἐπιβουλαῖς κατακεχωσμένον οὐ παριδὼν οὐδὲ τῇ τῶν αἰτίων παραχωρήσας κακίᾳ, ἐξὸν ἐφ’ ἕτερον ἐλθόντα, μυρίων ἄλλων εὐπορουμένων τῇ πόλει, ῥᾳστώνην εὕρασθαι τοῦ πόνου καὶ πραγμάτων ἀπηλλάχθαι.
 ὃ δὲ πρῶτον αὑτὸν ἐπὶ τὸ ἔργον ἐγείρας, εἶτα δὲ τὸν σύμπαντα λαὸν προθυμίᾳ ῥώσας καὶ μίαν ἐξ ἁπάντων μεγάλην χεῖρα συναγαών, πρῶτον ἆθλον ἠγωνίζετο, αὐτὴν δὴ μάλιστα τὴν ὑπὸ τῶν ἐχθρῶν πεπολιορκημένην, αὐτὴν τὴν προπονήσασαν καὶ τοὺς αὐτοὺς ἡμῖν καὶ πρὸ ἡμῶν διωγμοὺς ὑπομείνασαν, τὴν μητρὸς δίκην τῶν τέκνων ἐρημωθεῖσαν ἐκκλησίαν συναπολαῦσαι δεῖν οἰόμενος τῆς τοῦ παναγάθου μεγαλο- δωρεᾶς.
 ἐπειδὴ γὰρ τοὺς παῖδας αὖθις ὁ μέγας ποιμήν, τοὺς θῆρας καὶ τοὺς λύκους καὶ πᾶν ἀπηνὲς καὶ ἄγριον γένος ἀποσοβήσας καὶ τὰς μύλας τῶν λεόντων, ᾖ φησιν τὰ θεῖα λόγια, συντρίψας, ἐπὶ ταὐτὸν αὖθις συνελθεῖν ἠξίωσεν, δικαιότατα καὶ τῆς ποίμνης τὴν μάνδραν ἀνίστη τοῦ καταισχῦναι ἐχθρὸν καὶ ἐκδικητὴν καὶ ὡς ηαth formed this magnificent temple ofGod most hing, answering in its nature to the pattern of that ich is better, even as the visible answereth to the visible;
 nor could one describe with what noblenindedness, with whata liberal hand— whose will to ve wasinsatiable— and with what emulationonof you allyenobly ried withone another by the ge- hearthedness of your contributions in no come behind him in this selksame purpose.
 Αnd place- which thing also is worthy to be first οf all— which by the evil designs of emies had been corvered with all kinds of vile bbish, he did not overlook nor sunender to the alice οf those who did this, though he might have ighted upon another spot( for the city supplied untless other sites), and thus found relief from toil freedom from trouble.
 Νay, he first of all ed himself to the word;
 then by his zeal he ngthened the whole people, and gathering together all into οne great body, entered uponthet contest;
 for he deemed that she especially ho had been destroyed by the enemy, she whohad en aforetime afflictedandhad endured the same rsecutions as weandbefore us, even the church who ikea mother had been bereft οf her children, should ave her sharein the enjoymentofthe bountyof the- gracious God.
 For since once more the great hepherd, having driven away the wild beasts ande wolves and every kind of cruel and savage crature, and having broken the great teeth of the ions, as the divine oracles say, once more had vouched to bring Ηis sons together, it was most meet hat he should also set up the fold of the flock, thate might put to shame the enemy and the avenger, ἄν ἔλεγχον ταῖς θεομάχοις τῶν ἀσεβῶν προαγάγοι τόλμαις.
 καὶ νῦν οἳ μὲν οὐκ εἰαὶν οἱ θεομισεῖς, ὅτι μηδὲ ἦσαν, ἐς βραχὺ δὲ ταράξαντες καὶ ταραχθέντες, εἶθ’ ὑποσχόντες τιμωρίαν οὐ μεμπτὴν τῇ δίκη, ἑαυτοὺς καὶ φίλους καὶ οἴκους ἄρδην ἀναστάτους κατέστησαν, ὡς τὰς πάλαι στήλαις ἱεραῖς καταγραφείσας προρρήσεις ἔργοις πιστὰς ὁμολογεῖσθαι, δι’ ὧν τά τε ὤα ὁ θεῖος ἐπαληθεύει λόγος, ἀτὰρ καὶ τάδε περὶ αὐτῶν ἀποφαινόμενος‘ ῥομφαίαν ἐσπάσαντο οἱ ἁμαρτωλοί, ἐνέτειναν τόξον αὐτῶν τοῦ καταβαλεῖν πτωχὸν καὶ πένητα, τοῦ αφάξαι τοὺς εὐθεῖς τῆ καρδίᾳ·
 ἢ ῥομφαία αὐτῶν εἰέλθοι εἰς τὰς καρδίας αὐτῶν καὶ τὰ τόξα αὐτῶν συντριβείη’ καὶ πάλιν ἀπώλετο τὸ μνημόσυνον αὐτῶν μετ’ ἤχου,’ καὶ τὸ ὄνομα αὐτῶν ἐξήλειπται εἰς τὸν αἰῶνα καὶ εἰς τὸν αἰῶνα τοῦ αἰῶνος, ’ ὅτι δὴ καὶ ἐν κακοῖς γενόμενοι‘ ἐκέκραξαν, καὶ οὐκ ἢν ὁ σῴζων·
 πρὸς κύριον, καὶ οὐκ εἰσήκουσεν αὐτῶν, ἀλλ’ οἳ μὲν συνεποδίσθησαν καὶ ἔπεσαν, ἡμεῖς δὲ ἀνέστημεν καὶ ἀνωρθώθημεν’·
 καὶ τό γ’ ἐν τούτοις κύριε, ἐν τῆ πόλει σου τὴν εἰκόνα αὐτῶν ἐξουδενώσεις’ ἀληθὲς ὑπ’ ὀφθαλμοῖς πάντων ἀναπέφανται.
” Áλλ’ οἳ μὲν γιγάντων τρόπον θεομαχίαν ἐνστησάμενοι τοιαύτην εἰλήχασιν τὴν τοῦ βίου καταστροφήν·
 τῆς δ’ ἐρήμου καὶ παρ’ ἀνθρώποις ἀπεγνωσμένης οἷα τὰ ὁρώμενα τῆς κατὰ θεὸν ὑπομονῆς τὰ τέλη, ὡς ἀναφωνεῖν αὐτῇ τὴν πρὸ.
 φητείαν Ἡσαΐου ταῦτα εὐφράνθητι, ἔρημος διφῶσα ἀγαλλιάοθω ἔρημος καὶ ἀνθείτω ὡς κρίνον·
 καὶ ἐξανθήσει καὶ ἀγαλλιάσεται τὰ ἔρημα.
 ἰαχήσατε, and openly rebuke the evil deeds of impious men fighting against God.
 Αnd now these men, the haters of God, are no more, for they never were;
 but after troubling and being troubled fora little while, then they paid to Justice no contemptible penalty, accomplishing the utter overthrow of themselves, their friends and houses;
 so that thepredictions whieh longago had been inscribedon sacred records are confessedly proved trustworthybythe facts, in which among other true things that the divine word speaketh, this alsoit declareth concerning them:
‘ The wicked have drawn out the sword and have bent their bow;
 to east down the poor and needy, to slay the uprightin heart:
 may their sword enter into their own hearts, and may their bows be broken’;
 broken’;
 and again:
‘ Their perished witha sound,’ and‘ Their name hath blottedoutfor ever andforever and ever’;
 verily when they also were in trouble‘ They cried, and there was none to save:
 unto the Lord, and he did not hear them’;
 yea, they indeed‘ had their feet together and fell, but we rose and stood upright’;
 and that which was predictedin these words,‘ Lord, in thy city thou shalt set at naught their image,’ hath been shown to be true before the eyes of all.
“ But they verily, engaging like giants in battle against God, have thus brought their lives to a miserable end;
 while the issue of that godly enduranee on the part of her who was deserted and rekected by men was such as we have seen;
 so that the propheeyof Isaiah ealleth aloud unto her in these words:
‘ Be glad,Ο thirsty desert;
 let the desert rejoice and blossom as a lily;
 and the desert places shall blossom forth and rejoice.
.
.
.
 Be strong, ye hands that χεῖρες ἀνειμέναι καὶ γόνατα παραλελυμένα·
 παρακαλέσατε, ὀλιγόψυχοι τῆ διανοίᾳ, ἰσχύσατε, μὴ φοβεῖσθε.
 ἰδοὺ ὁ θεὸς ἡμῶν κρίσιν ἀνταποδίδωσιν καὶ ἀνταποδώσει, αὐτὸς ἥξει καὶ σώσει ἡμᾶς·
 ὅτι, φησίν, ἐρράγη ἐν τῇ ἐρήμῳ ὕδωρ, καὶ φάραγξ ἐν γῇ διψώσῃ, καὶ ἡ ἄνυδρος ἕαται εἰς ἕλη, καὶ εἰς τὴν διψῶσαν γῆν πηγὴ ὕδατος ἔσται.’
 ἴ’ καὶ τάδε μὲν λόγοις πάλαι προθεσπισθέντα βίβλοις ἱεραῖς καταβέβλητο, τά γε μὴν ἔργα οὐκέτ’ ἀκοαῖς, ἀλλ’ ἔργοις ἡμῖν παραδέδοται.
 ἡ ἔρημος ἥδε, ἡ ἄνυδρος, ἡ χήρα καὶ ἀπερίστατος, ἧς ὡς ἐν δρυμῷ ξύλων ἀξίναις ἐξέκοψαν τὰς πύλας, τὸ αὐτὸ ἐν πέλυκι καὶ λαξευτηρίῳ συνέτριψαν αὐτήν, ἦς καὶ τὰς βίβλους διαφθείραντες ἐνεπύρισαν ἐν πυρὶ τὸ ἁγιαστήριον τοῦ θεοῦ, εἰς τὴν γῆν ἐβεβήλωσαν τὸ σκήνωμα τοῦ ὀνόματος αὐτοῦ, ἢν ἐτρύγησαν πάντες οἱ παραπορευόμενοι τὴν ὁδὸν προκαθελόντες αὐτῆς τοὺς φραγμούς, ἢν ἐλυμήνατο ὗς ἐκ δρυμοῦ καὶ μονιὸς ἄγριος κατενεμήσατο, Χριστοῦ δυνάμει παραδόξῳ νῦν, ὅτε θέλει γέγονεν ὡς κρίνον·
 ἐπεὶ καὶ τότε αὐτοῦ νεύματι, ὡς ἀν’ προκηδομένου πατρὸς, ἐπαιδεύετο·
 ὂν γὰρ ἀγαπᾷ κύριος, παιδεύει, μαστιγοῖ δὲ πάντα υἱὸν ὃν παραδέχεται.
 μέτρῳ δῆτα κατὰ τὸ δέον ἐπιστραφεῖσα, αὖθις ἄνωθεν ἐξ ὑπαρχῆς ἀγαλλιᾶν προστάττεται ἐξανθεῖ τε ὡς κρίνον καὶ τῆς ἐνθέου εὐωδίας εἰς πάντας ἀποπνεῖ ἀνθρώπους, ὅτι, φησίν, ἐρράγη ἐν τῆ ἐρήμῳ ὕδωρ τὸ νᾶμα τῆς θείας τοῦ σωτηρίου λουτροῦ παλιγγενεσίας, καὶ νῦν γέγονεν ἡ πρὸ μικροῦ ἔρημος εἰς ἕλη, καὶ εἰς τὴν διφῶσαν γῆν ἔβρυσεν πηγὴ ὕδατος ζῶντος, ἴσχυσάν τε ὡς hang down, and ye palsied knees.
 Be of good courage, ye feeble- hearted,be strong, fear not;
 behold, our God recompenseth judgement, and will recompense;
 he will come and save you.
.
.
.
 For,’ saith he, broke outinthe desert, and a stream in thirsty ground.
 Αnd the waterless place shall become marsh- meadows,and upon the thirsty ground shall bea foundain of water. ’
“ Now these things, foretold long ago had been recorded in the sacred books in words;
 howbeti the deeds have come down to us no longerby hearsay,but in actual fact.
 This desert, this waterless plaee, this widowed and defenceless one, whose gates they cut down with axes as ina thicket of trees;
 whom together with hatchet and hammer they brake down;
 whose books also they destroyed and set ond frie the sanetuary of God;
 they profaned the dwelling- place of His nameto the ground;
 whom all they which pass by the waydid pluck, having before broken down her fences, whome the boar out of the wood did ravage and on whom the solitary wild beast did feed:
 now by the miraculous power of Christ, when Ηe willeth it, hath become asa lily.
 For at that time alsoby His command,as ofacareful father,she was chastened.
 For whom the Lord lovethΗe chasteneth,and scourgeth every son whom Ηe receiveth.
 So then, after being correctedin due measure, once more again She is bidden anew to rejoice, alld she, blossoms forth as a lily and breathes upon all menofher divine, sweet odour;
 for, saith he, water brokeout in the desert,the streams of the divine regeneration that the washingof salvation bestoweth;
 and that whicha short time before was deert hath now become marsh- meadows,and a fountain of living water hath burst forth upon the thirsty ground;
 and ἀληθῶς χεῖρες αἱ τὸ πρὶν ἀνειμέναι, καὶ τῆς τῶν χειρῶν ἰσχύος ἔργα τάδε τὰ μεγάλα καὶ ἐναργῆ δείγματα·
 ἀλλὰ καὶ τὰ πάλαι σεσαθρωμένα καὶ παρειμένα γόνατα τὰς οἰκείας ἀπολαβόντα βάσεις, τὴν ὁδὸν τῆς θεογνωσίας εὐθυποροῦντα βαδίζει, ἐπὶ τὴν οἰκείαν ποίμνην τοῦ παναγάθου ποιμένος σπεύδοντα.
 εἰ δὲ καὶ ταῖς τῶν τυράννων ἀπειλαῖς τὰς φυχάς τινες ἀπενάρκησαν, οὐδὲ τούτους ὁ σωτήριος ἀθεραπεύτους παρορᾷ λόγος, εὖ μάλα δὲ καὶ αὐτοὺς ἰώμενος ἐπὶ τὴν τοῦ θείου παράκλησιν παρορμᾷ λέγων·
ἴ’ παρακαλέσατε, οἱ ὀλιγόψυχοι τῇ διανοίᾳ, ἰσχύσατε, μὴ φοβεῖσθε. ’
 τούτων δεῖν ἀπολαῦσαι τὴν διὰ θεὸν γενομένην ἔρημον τοῦ λόγου προαγορεύοντος, ἐπακούσας ὀξείᾳ διανοίας ἀκοῇ οὗτος ὁ νέος ἡμῶν καὶ καλὸς Ζοροβαβελ μετὰ τὴν πικρὰν ἐκείνην αἰχμαλωσίαν καὶ τὸ βδέλυγμα τῆς ἐρημώσεως, οὐ παριδὼν τὸ πτῶμα νεκρόν, πρώτιστα πάντων παρακλήσεσιν καὶ λιταῖς ἵλεω τὸν πατέρα μετὰ τῆς κοινῆς ὑμῶν ἁπάντων ὁμοφροσύνης καταστησάμενος καὶ τὸν μόνον νεκρῶν ξωοποιὸν αύμμαχον παραλαβὼν συνεργόν, τὴν πεσοῦσαν ἐξήγειρεν προαποκαθάρας καὶ προθεραπεύσας τῶν κακῶν, καὶ στολὴν οὐ τὴν ἐξ ἀρχαίου παλαιὰν αὐτῇ περιτέθεικεν, ἀλλ’ ὁποίαν αὖθις παρὰ τῶν θείων χρησμῶν ἐξεπαιδεύετο, σαφῶς ὧδε λεγόντων καὶ ἔσται ἡ δόξα τοῦ οἴκου τούτου ἡ ἐσχάτη ὑπὲρ τὴν προτέραν.’
 Ταύτῃ δ’ οὖν πολὺ μείζονα τὸν χῶρον ἅπαντα περιλαβών, τὸν μὲν ἔξωθεν ὠχυροῦτο περίβολονin very truth hands that before hung down have me strong, of the stength of which hands theset and maniifest works are tokens.
 Yea, and thees that longagowere diseased and relaxed have vered their natural movement, and go straight ard upon the way of the knowledgeof God, tinh to the flock of the all- gracious Shepherd, eir true home.
 But if through the threats of the ants the souls of some have waxed numb, not even ese the saving Word pass by as incurable, but ht Ηe health them also and urgeth them on ards divine encouragement, encouragement, saying:
‘ Be of courage, ye feeble- hearted,be strong, fear not. ’
“ The word which prophesied that she whom God made desert was to enjoy these blessings, this new and goodly Zerubbabel1 heard with the sharp ingof his mind, after that bitter captivityand abomination of desolation;
 nor did he passbye corpseas dead, but first of all with entreatiesd prayer he propitiated the Father with the common nsent οf you all;
 and taking as his Αlly and Fellow- rker Himwho alone can quicken the dead,he ised up her that had fallen, having first cleansed and aled her οf her ills;
 and he clothed her witha ent, the old one that she hadfromthe geinning, but with sucha one ashewas once more cted bythe divine oracles, which thus clearlyy:
‘ Αnd the latterglory of this house shall be ater than the former.’
“ Thus, then, the whole area that he enclosed was uch larger.
 2 The outer enclosure he made strong τῷ τοῦ παντὸς περιτειχίσματι, ὡς ἄν ἀσφαλέστατον εἴη τοῦ παντὸς ἕρκος·
 πρόπυλον δὲ μέγα καὶ εἰς ὕφος ἐπηρμένον πρὸς αὐτὰς ἀνίσχοντος ἡλίου ἀκτῖνας ἀναπετάσας, ἤδη καὶ τοῖς μακρὰν περιβόλων ἔξω ἱερῶν ἑστῶσιν τῆς τῶν παρέσχεν ἀφθονίαν θέας, μόνον οὐχὶ καὶ τῶν ἀλλοτρίων τῆς πίστεως ἐπὶ τὰς πρώτας εἰσόδους ἐπιστρέφων τὰς ὄφεις, ὡς ἂν μὴ παρατρέχοι τις ὅτι μὴ τὴν ψυχὴν κατανυγεὶς πρότερον μνήμη τε πρὶν ἐρημίας καὶ τῆς νῦν παραδόξου θαυματουρυίας, ὑφ’ ἧς τάχα καὶ ἑλκυσθήσεσθαι κατανυγέντα καὶ πρὸς αὐτῆς τῆς ὄφεως ἐπὶ τὴν εἴσοδον προτραπήσεσθαι ἤλπισεν.
 εἴσω δὲ παρελθόντι ἐλθόντι πυλῶν οὐκ εὐθὺς ἐφῆκεν ἀνάγνοις καὶ ἀνίπτοις ποσὶν τῶν ἔνδον ἐπιβαίνειν ἁγίων, δια- λαβὼν δὲ πλεῖστον ὅσον τὸ μεταξὺ τοῦ τε νεὼ καὶ τῶν πρώτων εἰαόδων, τέτταρσι μὲν πέριξ ἐγκαρσίοις κατεκόσμησεν στοαῖς, εἰς τετράγωνόν τι σχῆμα περιφράξας τὸν τόπον, κίοσι πανταχόθεν ἐπαιρομέναις·
 ὧν τὰ μέσα διαφράγμασι τοῖς ἀπὸ ξύλου δικτυωτοῖς ἐς τὸ σύμμετρον ἥκουσι μήκους περικλείσας, μέσον αἴθριον ἠφίει εἰς τὴν τοῦ οὐρανοῦ κάτοψιν, λαμπρὸν καὶ ταῖς τοῦ φωτὸς ἀκτῖσιν ἀνειμένον ἀέρα παρέχων.
 ἱερῶν δ’ ἐνταῦθα καθαρσίων ἐτίθει σύμβολα, κρήνας ἄντικρυς εἰς πρόσωπον ἐπισκευάζων τοῦ νεὼ πολλῷ τῷ χεύματι τοῦ νάματος τοῖς περιβόλων ἱερῶν ἐπὶ τὰ ἔσω προϊοῦσιν τὴν ἀπόρυψιν παρεχομένας.
 καὶ πρώτη μὲν εἰσιόντων αὕτη διατριβή, κόσμον ὁμοῦ καὶ ἀγλαίαν τῷ παντὶ τοῖς τε τῶν πρώτων εἰσαγωγῶν ἔτι δεομένοις κατάλληλον τὴν μονὴν παρεχομένη.
 with the surrounding surrounding the whole, so thatit might a most secure defence thereof;
 while he spreadta porch, great and raised aloft, towards the raysthe rising sun,and even to those standing far outside the sacred precincts supplied no scanty view of at which is within;
 thus, one might say, turning he gaze, even of strangers to the faith, towards thet entrances, so that none might hastily pass by ithout first haring his soul mightily struck by the emoryof the former desolation and the wondrous iracle οf to- day;
 struck by which he hoped that rchance such a one wouldalso be impelled, and ve his steps tumed forwards bythebare sight, wards the entrance.
 Νow he hath not permittedim that passethinsidethe gates to tread forthwithith unhallowed and unwashen feet upon the holy laces withing;
 but hath lefta space exceeding large tween the temple and the first entrances, and orned it au around with four transvers colonnades, encing the place into a kindof quadrangular figure, ith pillars raised on every side, and filling the spaces tween them with wooden barriers οf lattice- work ising toa convenient height;
 and in the midst ereof he hath left an open space where men canethe sky, thus providing it with air bright and pen to the raysoflight Αnd herehehath placedof sacred purifications, by erecting fountains ightoppositethe temple,whose copious streams οf owing water supply cleansing to those who are vancing within the sacred precincts.
 Αnd this is he first stopping- place for those that enter;
 supply-g at once adornmentand splendour tothe whole,d a place οf sojourn suited to suchasare still in need οf their first instructions.
“ Ἀλλὰ γὰρ καὶ τὴν τούτων θέαν παραμειφάμένος, πλείοαιν ἔτι μᾶλλον τοῖς ἐνδοτάτω προπύλοις τὰς ἐπὶ τὸν νεὼν παρόδους ἀναπεπταμένας ἐποίει, ὑπὸ μὲν ταῖς ἡλίου βολαῖς αὖθις τρεῖ πύλας ὑφ’ ἓν καταθεὶς πλευρόν, ὧν πολὺ τὰς παρ’ ἑκάτερα μεγέθει τε καὶ πλάτει πλεονεκτεῖν τῇ μέσῃ χαριαάμενος παραπήγμααί τε χαλκοῦ σιδηροδέτοις καὶ ποικίλμασιν ἀναγλύφοις διαφερόντως αὐτὴν φαιδρύνας, ὡς ἂν βααιλίδι ταύτῃ τοὺς δορυφόρους ὑπέζευξεν·
 τὸν αὐτὸν δὲ τρόπον καὶ ταῖς παρ’ ἑκάτερα τοῦ παντὸς νεὼ στοαῖς τὸν τῶν προπύλων ἀριθμὸν διατάξας, ἄνωθεν ἐπὶ ταύταις ἄλλῳ πλείονι φωτὶ διαφόρους τὰς ἐπὶ τὸν οἶκον εἰαβολὰς ἐπενόει, ταῖς ἀπὸ ξύλου λεπτουργίαις καὶ τὸν περὶ αὐτὰς κόσμον καταποικίλλων.
 “ τὸν δὲ βασίλειον οἶκον πλουσιωτέραις ἤδη καὶ δαψιλέσι ταῖς ὕλαις ὠχύρου, ἀφθόνῳ φιλοτιμίᾳ τῶν ἀναλωμάτων χρώμενος·
 ἔνθα μοι δοκῶ περιττὸν εἶναι τοῦ δομήματος μήκη τε καὶ πλάτη καταγράφειν, τὰ φαιδρὰ ταῦτα κάλλη καὶ τὰ λόγου κρείττονα μεγέθη τήν τε τῶν ἔργων ἀποατίλβουααν ὄφιν τῷ λόγῳ διεξιόντι ὕφη τε τὰ οὐρανομήκη καὶ τὰς τούτων ὑπερκειμένας πολυτελεῖς τοῦ Λιβάνου κέδρους, ὧν οὐδὲ τὸ θεῖον λόγιον τὴν μνήμην ἀπεαιώπησεν εὐφρανθήσεται᾿ φάσκον‘ τὰ ξύλα τοῦ κυρίου, καὶ αἱ κέδροι τοῦ Λιβάνου ἃς ἐφύτευσεν.
“ Tί με δεῖ νῦν τῆς πανσόφου καὶ ἀρχιτεκτονικῆς 4 διατάξεως καὶ τοῦ κάλλους τῆς ἐφ’ ἑκάστου μέρους ὑπερβολῆς ἀκριβολογεῖαθαι τὴν ὑφήγησιν, ὅτε τῆς ὄψεως τὴν διὰ τῶν ὤτων ἀποκλείει μάθησιν ἡ“But verily, passing by this spectacle, he hath own οpen passages to the templeby meansof nermost porches in still greater numbers, once againder the rays οf the sun placing three gates on οne de, upon the middle one of which he hath bestowed height and side that far surpasseth the two on either ide, and hath singled it out for special adornment ith bronze fastenings bound with iron and varied bossed work, making the othersa bodyguard, as were, beneath it as their queen.
 Αnd after thee manner he hath also ordered the number of the rches for the colonnades on either side of the tire temple;
 and above them hath derised as well parate opening into the building to give still further ght;
 and for these also he hath wroughta varied ornment with delicately- carved wood.
 ‘‘ Νow as totheroyal house, 1 he hath builded it of thundant and still richer materials, eagerly desiring spare no expenses.
I deem it superfluousfor me to escribehere the lengthand breadth ofthe edifice, recount in fullthe brilliant beauty, the magnitude words can express, and the dazzling appearance οfe workmanship, yea, and the loftniness that reacheth eaven, and the costly cedars of Lebanon that are hced above;
 the mention of which even the divine acle doth not pass overin silence, sayinn:
‘ The eesofthe Lord shall be glad, even the cedars οf banon which he hath planted. ’
“ Why needI now speak more partieularly οf the perfect widom and art with which the building hath been ordered, and the surpassing beauty οf every part, when the witness of the eyes leaveth no plaee for the instruction that cometh through the ears? μαρτυρία;
 ἀλλὰ γὰρ ὧδε καὶ τὸν νεὼν ἐπιτελέσας θρόνοις τε τοῖς ἀνωτάτω εἰς τὴν τῶν προέδρων τιμὴν καὶ προσέτι βάθροις ἐν τάξει τοῖς καθ’ ὅλου κατὰ τὸ πρέπον κοσμήσας ἐφ’ ἅπασίν τε τὸ τῶν ἁγίων ἅγιον θυσιαστήριον ἐν μέσῳ θείς, αὗθις καὶ τάδε, ὡς ἂν εἴη τοῖς πολλοῖς ἄβατα, τοῖς ἀπὸ ξύλου περιέφραττε δικτύοις εἰς ἄκρον ἐντέχνου λεπτουργίας ἐξησκημένοις, ὡς θαυμάσιον τοῖς ὁρῶσιν παρέχειν τὴν θέαν.
“ Ἀλλ’ οὐδὲ τοὔδαφος ἄρα εἰς ἀμελὲς ἔκειτο αὐτῷ·
 καὶ τόδε γοῦν λίθῳ μαρμάρῳ εὖ μάλα κόσμῳ παντὶ λαμπρύνας, ἤδη λοιπὸν καὶ ἐπὶ τὰ ἐκτὸς τοῦ νεὼ μετῄει, ἐξέδρας καὶ οἴκους τοὺς παρ’ ἑκάτερα μεγίστους ἐπισευάζων ἐντέχνως ἐπὶ ταὐτὸν εἰς πλευρὰ τῷ βασιλείῳ συνεζευγμένους μένους καὶ ταῖς ἐπὶ τὸν μέσον οἶκον εἰσβοΛαῖς ἡνωμένους·
 ἃ καὶ αὐτὰ τοῖς ἔτι καθάρσεως καὶ περιρραντηρίων τῶν διὰ ὕδατος καὶ ἁγίου πνεύματος ἐγχρῂζουσιν ὁ εἰρηνικώτατος ἡμῶν Σολομὼν ὁ τὸν νεὼν τοῦ θεοῦ δειμάμενος ἀπειργάζετο, ὡς μηκέτι λόγον, ἀλλ’ ἔργον γεγονέναι τὴν ἄνω λεχθεῖσαν προφητείαν·
 γέγονεν ἴ’ γὰρ καὶ νῦν ὡς ἀληθῶς ἐστιν ἡ δόξα τοῦ οἴκου τούτου ἡ ἐσχάτη ὑπὲρ τὴν προτέραν.
“ Ἔδει γὰρ καὶ ἀκόλουθον ἦν τοῦ ποιμένος αὐτῆς καὶ δεσπότου ἅπαξ τὸν ὑπὲρ αὐτῆς θάνατον κάτα·
 δεξαμένου καὶ μετὰ τὸ πάθος, δ’ χάριν αὐτῆς ῥυπῶν ἐνεδύσατο σῶμα ἐπὶ τὸ λαμπρὸν καὶ ἔνδόξον μεταβεβληκότος ἀυτὴν τε σάρκα τὴν λυθεῖσαν ἐκ φθορᾶς εἰς ἀφθαρσίαν ἀγαγόντος, καὶ τήνδε Νevertheless, having thus completed the temple he adοrnedit with thrones, very lorty, to do honour untothe Ρresidents,and likewise with benches arranged in order throughout in a convenient manner;
 and after all these he hath plaeed in the midst the holy of holies eventhe altar, and again surroundedthis part also, that the multitude might not trea thereon, with a fence of wooden lattice- work, delicately wrought with the crartsman’s utmost skill, so as to presentamarvellous Spectaele to those that see it.
“ Νor dideven the pavement, as one might suppose, escape his care.
 This also, for example, he hath made exceeding brilliant with every kind of fair marble;
 and then, finally, passing on outside the temple as well, he hath construeted chambers and buildingon either side, very large, the which he hath skilfully μnited together to the sides ofthe royal house, 1 and These with the openings into the central building.
 These also were wrought byourmost peaceful solomon, who builded the temple of God, for those who still have need of cleansing and sprinkling with water and the Ηoly spirit, insomuch that the aforesaid said prophecy 2 is no longera word only, but is becomea fact.
 For the latter glory of this house hath become, and in truth evennow is, greater thanthe fonner.
“ For itwas meetand right that, as her shepherd and Lord had suffered οnce for all death on her behalf, and after the Ρassion had changed the foul body with which Ηe had clothed Ηinself for her sake into His splendid and glOrious body, and brought the very flesh that was dissoleved from corruption into incor- ὁμοίως τῶν τοῦ σωτῆρος οἰκονομιῶν ἐπαύρασθαι, ὅτι δὴ καὶ τούτων πολὺ κρείττονα λαβοῦσα παρ’ αὐτοῦ τὴν ἐπαγγελίαν, τὴν πολὺ μείζονα δόξαν τῆς παλιγγενεσίας ἐν ἀφθάρτου σώματος ἀναστάσάσει μετὰ φωτὸς ἀγγέλων χορείας ἐν τοῖς οὐρανῶν ἐπέκεινα τοῦ θεοῦ βασιλείοις σὺν αὐτῷ Χρισῷ Ἰησοῦ τῷ πανευερυέετῃ καὶ σωτῆρι διαρκῶς ἐπὶ τοὺς ἑξῆς αἰῶνας ἀπολαβεῖν ποθεῖ.
 ἀλλὰ γὰρ τέως ἐπὶ τοῦ παρόντος τούτοις ἡ πάλαι χήρα καὶ ἔρημος θεοῦ χάριτι περιβληθεῖσα τοῖς ἄνθεσιν γέγονεν ἀληθῶς ὡς κρίνον, ᾖ φησιν ἡ προφητεία, καὶ τὴν νυμφικὴν ἀναλαβοῦσα στολὴν τόν τε τῆς εὐπρεπείας περιθεμένη στέφανον οἷα χορεύειν διὰ Ησαΐου παιδεύεται τὰ χαριστήρια τῷ βασιλεῖ θεῷ φωναῖς εὐφήμοις γεραίρουσα, αὐτῆς λεγούσηςἴ’ ἐπακούωμεν‘ ἀγαλλιάσθω ἡ ψυχή μου ἐπὶ κυρίῳ·
 ἐνέδυσεν γάρ με ἱμάτιον σωτηρίου καὶ χιτῶνα εὐφροσύνης·
 περιέθηκέν μοι ὡς νυμφίῳ μίτραν, καὶ ὡς νύμφην κατεκόσμησέν με κόσμῳ·
 καὶ ὡς γῆν αὔξουσαν τὸ ἄνθος αὐτῆς, καὶ ὡς κῆπος τὰ σπέρματα αὐτοῦ ἀνατελεῖ, οὕτως κύριος κύριος ἀνέτειλεν δικαιοσύνην καὶ ἀγαλλίαμα ἐνώπιον τῶν ἐθνῶν.’
 “ τούτοις μὲν οὗν αὕτη χορεύει·
 οἵοις δὲ καὶ ὁἴ’ νυμφίος, λόγος ὁ οὐράνιος, αὐτὸς Ἰησοῦς Χριστὸς αὐτὴν ἀμείβεται, ἄκουε λέγοντος κυρίου μὴ φοβοῦ ὅτι κατῃσχύνθης μηδὲ ἐντραπῇς ὅτι ὠνειδίσθης·
 ὅτι αἰσχύνην αἰώνιον ἐπιλήσῃ καὶ ὄνειδος τῆς ruption, she also likewise should enjoy the fruits ofe dispensations of the sariour.
 For verily having eived from Him a promise of much betterthings even these, she longeth to receive as her due, tingly and for the ages that are to come, the mucheater glory ofthenew birth intheresurrection ofanincorruptible body, in the company of the choir the angels of light in the kingdoms οf God beyonde heavens, with Christ Jesus Himself her supreme nefector and Saviour.
 But meanwhile in the ent time shewho hath long beena widow and eserted hath been robed by the grace of Godwithese blossoms, and is becomein truth asa lily, as ith the prophecy;
 and haring received again the arb οf a bride and put on the gariand of beauty, she taught by Isaiah to dance, as it were, presenting er thank- ofering to the glory of God the King in words of praise.
 Let us listen to her as she saith:
 Let my soul rejoice in the Lord;
 for he hath clothed me vith the gannent of salvation and the cloke οf ladness, he hath put a chaplet upon measa brideoom, and hath adomed me mth adomment asa ride.
 And as the earth that maketh her flowerto ow, and as the garden causeth the things that are wn in it to spring forth;
 so the Lord, the Lord, ill cause righteeousness and rejoicing to spring forth efore all the nations. ’
“ With thesewords, then, she danceth.
 But with hat words the Bridegroom also, even the heavenly ord, Jesus Christ Ηimself, answereth her, hear the rd as Ηe saith:
‘ Fear notfor that thou hastbeen ut to shame;
 neither dread for that thou hast en put to reproach:
 for thou shalt forget thy everything shame, and the reproach of thy widowhood χηρείας ἀοῦ οὐ μὴ μνησθήσῃ, οὐχ ὡς γυναῖκα ἐγκαταλελειμμένην καὶ ὀλιγόψυχον κέκληκέν σε κύριος οὐδ’ ὡς γυναῖκα ἐκ νεότητος μεμισημένην.
 εἶπεν ὁ θεός ἀοῦ·
 χρόνον μικρὸν ἐγκατέλιπόν σε, καὶ ἐν ἐλέῳ μεγάλῳ ἐλεήσω ἄε·
 ἐν θυμῷ μικρῷ ἀπέστρεφε τὸ πρόσωπόν μου ἀπὸ ἀοῦ, καὶ ἐν ἐλέῳ αἰωνίῳ ἐλεήσω ἄε·
 εἶπεν ὁ ῥυσάμενός ἄε κύριος.
 ἐξεγείρου, ἐξεγείρου, ἡ πιοῦσα ἐκ χειρὸςὸ ποτήριον τοῦ θυμοῦ αὐτοῦ·
 τὸ ποτήριον γὰρ τῆς πτώσεως, τὸ κόνδυ τοῦ θυμοῦ μου, ἐξέπιες καὶ ἐξεκένωσας.
 καὶ οὐκ ἦν ὁ παρακαλῶν σε ἀπὸ πάντων τῶν τέκνων ἀοῦ ὧν ἔτεκες, καὶ οὐκ ἢν ὁ ἀντιλαμβανόμενος τῆς χειρός σου.
 ἰδοὺ εἴληφα ἐκ τῆς χειρός ἀοῦ τὸ ποτήριον τῆς πτώσεως, τὸ κόνδυ τοῦ θυμοῦ μου, καὶ οὐ προσθήσεις ἔτι πιεῖν αὐτό·
 καὶ δώσω αὐτὸ εἰς τὰς χεῖρας τῶν ἀδίκη·
 σάντων ἄε καὶ τῶν ταπεινωσάντων σε.
 ἐξεγείρου, ἐξεγείρου, ἔνδυσαι τὴν ἰσχύν, ἔνδυσαι τὴν δόξαν ἀοῦ·
 ἐκτίναξαι τὸν χοῦν καὶ ἀνάστηθι.
 κάθισον, ἔκλυσαι τὸν δεσθὸν τοῦ τραχήλου ἀοῦ.
 ἆρον κύκλῳ τοὺς ὀφθαλμούς ἀοῦ καὶ ἴδε συνηγμένα τὰ τέκνα σου·
 ἰδοὺ συνήχθησαν καὶ ἦλθον πρός σε·
 ζῶ ἐγώ, λέγει κύριος, ὅτι πάντας αὐτοὺς ὡς κόσμον ἐνδύσῃ καὶ περιθήσῃ αὐτοὺς ὡς κόσμον νύμφης.
 ὅτι τὰ ἔρημά σου καὶ τὰ διεφθαρμένα καὶ τὰ καταπεπτωκότα νῦν στενοχωρήσει ἀπὸ τῶν κατοικούντων σε, καὶ μακρυνθήσουται ἀπὸ σοῦ οἱ καταπίνοντές σε.
 ἐροῦσιν γὰρ εἰς τὰ ὧτά σου οἱ υἱοί σου οὓς ἀπολώλεκας ‘ στενός μοι ὁ τόπος, ποίησόν μοι τόπον ἵνα κατοικήσω,’ καὶ ἐρεῖς ἐν τῆ καρδίᾳ σουἴ’ τίς ἐγέννησέν μοι τούτους;
 ἐγὼ δὲ ἄτεκνος καὶ χήρα τούτους δὲ τίς ἐξέθρεψένIt thou remember no more.
.
.
 Not asawife aken and rriaInt- hearted hath the Lordcalled thee,r asa wife hated from her youth, saith thy God.
 or a little timeI forsook thee;
 and with great mercy will have mercy on thee.
 In a little wrathI hid my face from thee, and with everlasting mercyI will vemercyοn thee, saith the Lord who delivered Awake, awake,.
.
.
 thou who hast dmnke hand ofthe Lord the cup of his fury;
 for the cup staggering, the bowlof fury, thou hast drunk and it.
 Αnd there was none to comfort thee ong all thy sons whom thou hast brought forth;
 there was none to take thee by the hand.
.
.
.
 holdI have takenout οf thine hand thecup of gering, the bowl of my fury;
 and thou shalt no re it again:
 andI willput it into the handsthem that did theewrongand of them that umbled thee.
.
.
.
 Αwake, awake,puton strength,.
.
 put οn thy glory.
.
.
.
 shake off the dust and ise sit thce down.
.
.
 loose the band from thy ck.
 Lift up thine eyes round about and beholdy children gathered together Behold they were thered together and came to thee.
 ΑsI live,ith the Lord, thou shalt clothe thee with them all with an ornament, and gird thyself with them as ith the ornament of a bride.
 For thy desolate and estroyed and ruined places shall now be too straitreasonοf them that inhabit thee, and they that wallow thee up shall be far away from thee.
 For sons whom thou hast lost shall say in thy ears, the placeistoo strait for me:
 give place to me thatΙ ay dwell.’
 Αnd thou shaltsay in thine heart, th hegortenme these?I am childrenanda idow, but as for these, who hathbrought me them μοι;
 ἐγὼ δὲ κατελείφθην μόνη, οὗτοι δέ μοι ποῦ ἦσαν;’
 Ταῦτα Ἡσαΐας προεθέσπισεν, ταῦτα πρόπαλαι περὶ ἡμῶν ἐν ἱεραῖς βίβλοις καταβέβλητο, χρῆν δέ που τούτων τὴν ἀψεύδειαν ἤδη ποτὲ ἔργοις παραλαβεῖν.
 ἀλλὰ γὰρ τοιαῦτα τοῦ νυμφίου λόγου πρὸς τὴν ἑαυτοῦ νύμφην τὴν ἱερὰν καὶ ἁγίαν ἐκκλησιαν ἐπιφωνοῦντος, εἰκότως ὁ νυμφοστόλος ὅδε αὐτήν, τὴν ἔρημον, τὴν πτῶμα κειμένην, τὴν παρὰ ἀνθρώποις ἀνέλπιδα, ταῖς κοιναῖς ἁπάντων ἡμῶν εὐχαῖς χεῖρας τὰς ὑμῶν αὐτῶν ὀρέξας ἐξήγειρεν καὶ ἐξαωέστησεν θεοῦ τοῦ παμβασιλέως νεύματι καὶ τῆς Ἰησοῦ Χριστοῦ δυνάμεως ἐπιφανείᾳ τοι.
 αὐτὴν τε ἀναστήσας κατεστήσατο, οἵαν ἐκ τῆς τῶν ἱερῶν χρησμῶν καταγραφῆς ἐδιδάσκετο.
“ Θαῦμα μὲν οὖν μέγιστον τοῦτο καὶ πέρα πάσης ἐκπλήξεως, μάΛιστα τοῖς ἐπὶ μόνη τῆ τῶν ἔξωθεν φαντασίᾳ τὸν νοῦν προσανέχουσιν·
 θαυμάτων δὲ θαυμασιώτεπα τά τε ἀρχέτυπα καὶ τούτων τὰ πρωτότνπα καὶ θεοπρεπῆ παραδείγματα, τὰ τῆς ἐνθέου φημὶ καὶ λογικῆς ἐν Ψυχαῖς οἰκοδομῆς ἀνανεώματα·
 ἣν αὐτὸς ὁ θεόπαις κατ’ εἰκόνα τὴν αὐτὸς αὐτοῦ δημιουργήσας πάντη τε καὶ κατὰ πάντα τὸ θεοείκελον δεδωρημένος, ἄφθαρτον φύσιν, ἀσώματον, λογικήν, πάσης γεώδους ὕλης ἀλλοτρίαν, αὐτουοερᾶν οὐσίαν, ἅπαξ τὸ πρῶτον ἐκ τοῦ μὴ ὄντος εἰς τὸ εἶναι συστησάμενος, νύμφην ἁγίαν καὶ νεὼν πανίερον ἑαυτῷ τε καὶ τῷ πατρὶ κατιργάσατο·
 up?Iwas left alone, but these, where hadI them?’“ These things Isaiah prophesied, these things had οf οld been recorded concerning us in sacred books;
 but it was neeessary that somehow we should come to learn their truthfulness at some time by facts.
 Moreover, since the Brdegroom, even the Word, thus addressethΗis Bride,the sacredandΗοly church,fittingly did this paranymph 1 streteh out your hands in the common prayers of you all, and awake and raise up her who was desolate, who lay likea corpse, οf whommen despaired, by the will of God the universal King and the manifestation οf the power οf Jesus Christ;
 and having raised he restored her to be such as he learnt from the record of the sacred oracles.
“Α mightly wonder truly is this, and surpassing all amazement, especially inthe eyes of such as take heed onlyto the appearance of outward things.
 But more wonderful than wonders are the archetypes, the rational prototypes of these things, and their divine models,2I mean the renewal οf theGod- given, spirtual edincein our souls.
 This edifice the Son of God Himself created in Ηis own image,and everywhere and in all things hath bestowed upon it the divine likeness, an incorruptible nature, an essence incorporeal, spiritual,a stranger to all earthly matter and endowed with intelligence of its οwn;
 once for all at the first Ηe fonned it into being from that which was not, and hath made ita holy bride and an allsacred temple for Himself and the Father.
 Αnd this ειρυάσατο·
 ὃ καὶ σαφῶς αὐτὸς ὁμολογῶν ἐκφαίνει, λέγων‘ ἐνοικήσω ἐν αὐτοῖς καὶ ἐμπεριπατήσω, καὶ ἔσομαι αὐτῶν θεὸς καὶ αὐτοὶ ἔσονταί μοι λαός.’
 καὶ τοιαύτη μὲν ἡ τελεία καὶ κεκαθαρμένη ψυκή, ἀρχῆθεν οὕτω γεγενημένη, οἵα τὸν οὐράνιον λόγον ἀγαλματοφορεῖν.
 Αλλὰ γὰρ φθόνῳ καὶ ζήλῳ τοῦ φιλοπονήρου δαίμονος φιλοπαθὴς καὶ φθκιοπόνηρος ἐξ αὐτεξουσίου αἱρέσεως γενομένη, ὑπαναχωρήσαντος αὐτῆς τοῦ θείου ὡς ἂν ἔρημος προστάτου, εὐάλωτος καὶ εἰς ἐπιβουλὴν εὐχερὴς τοῖς ἐκ μακροῦ διαφθονουμένοις ἀπελήλεγκται, ταῖς τε τῶν ἀοράτων ἐχθρῶν καὶ νοητῶν πολεμίων ἑλεπόλεσι καὶ μηχαναῖς καταβληθεῖσα, πτῶμα ἐξαίσιον καταπέπτωκεν, ὡς ὅσον οὐδ’ ἐπὶ λίθῳ λίθον τῆς ἀρετῆς ἑστῶτα ἐν αὐτῇ διαμεῖναι, ὅλην δὲ δι’ ὅλου χαμαὶ κεῖσθαι νεκράν, τῶν περὶ θεοῦ φυσικῶν ἐννοιῶν πάμπαν ἀπεστερημένη.
 πεπτωκυῖαν δῆτα αὐτὴν ἐκείνην τὴν κατ’ εἰκόνα θεοῦ κατασκευασθεῖσαν ἐλυμήνατο οὐχ ὗς οὗτος ὁ ἐκ δρυμοῦ τοῦ παρ’ ἡμῖν ὁρατοῦ, ἀλλά τις φθοροποιὸς δαίμων καὶ θῆρες ἄγριοι νοητοί, οἳ καὶ τοῖς πάθεσιν οἷα πεπυρακτωμένοις τῆς ἁφῶν κακίας βέλεσιν αὐτὴν ἐξυφάψαντες, ἐνεπύρισαν ἐν πυρὶ τὸ θεῖον ὄντως ἀγιαστήριον τοῦ θεοῦ εἰς τὴν γῆν τε ἐβεβήλωσαν τὸ σκήνωμα τοῦ ὀνόματος αὐτοῦ, εἶτα πολλῷ τῷ προσχώματι τὴν ἀθλίαν κατορύξαντες, εἰς ἀνέλπιστον πάσης περιέτρεψαν σωτηρίας.
 Αλλ’ ὅ γε κηδεμὼν αὐτῆς λόγος ὁ θεοφεγγὴς καὶ σωτήριος τὴν κατ’ ἀξίαν δίκην τῶν ἁμαρτημάτων ὑποσχοῦσαν αὖθις ἐξ ὑπαρχῆς ἀνελάμβανεν, πατρὸς παναγάθου φιλανθρωπίᾳ πειθόμενος.
 αὐτὰς also Ηe Himself clearly showeth, when Ηe thus confesseth:
 ‘I will dwellin them, and walk in them;
 andI willbe their God, and they shall be my people.’
 Such then, is the perfect and purified soul, thus begotten from the beginning so as to bear the image οf the heavenly Word.
“ But when throughthe envy and jealousyοf demon which loveth evil she became of her own free choicea lover of that which is sensual and evil, and the Deity departed from her, leaving her bereft οfa protector,she fell an easy capture and prey to the snares of those who long had enried her;
 and, laid low by the engines and machines of her invisible enemiesand spiritual foes, she fella tremendous fall, so that not even one stone upon another of her virtue remained standing in her;
 nay, she lay her full lengthupon the ground, absolutely dead, altogether deprived of her inborn thoughts concerning God.
 Yea, verily,as shelay fallen there, she whowas made in the imageof God, it was not that boar οut of the wood which we can see that ravagedher, but some death- dealing demon and spiritual wild beasts, who also have inflamed her with their passions as with fiery darts of their οwn wickedness, and haveset the truly divine sanctuary ofGod on fire,and have profaned the dwelling- place of Ηis name to the ground;
 then they buried the hapless οne in a greatheap οf earth,and brought hertoa state bereftof all hopeofsalvation.
 “ But her Guardian,the Word,the divinely- bright andsaving one, when she had paid the just penalty for her sins, once moreagain rertored her, hearkening to the living- kindness οf an all- gracious Father.
 δὴ οὗν πρώτας τὰς τῶν ἀνωτάτω βασιλευόντων ψυχὰς προελόμενος, τῶν μὲν δυσσεβῶν καὶ ὀλεθρίων πάντων αὐτῶν τε τῶν δεινῶν καὶ θεομισῶν τυράννων τὴν οἰκουμένην ἅπασαν δι’ αὐτῶν τῶν θεοφιλεστάτων ἐκαθήρατο·
 εἶτα δὲ τοὺς αὐτῷ γνωρίμους ἄνδρας, τοὺς πάλαι διὰ βίου ἱερωμένους αὐτῷ, κρύβδην γε μὴν ὡς ἐν κακῶν χειμῶνι πρὸς τῆς αὐτοῦ σκέπης καλυπτομένους, εἰς φανερὸν ἀγαγὼν καὶ ταῖς τοῦ πατρὸς μεγαλοδωρεαῖς ἐπαξίως τιμήσας, αὖθις καὶ διὰ τούτων τὰς μικρῷ πρόσθεν ἐρρυπωμένας ψυχὰς ὕλης τε παντοίας καὶ χώματος ἀσεβῶν ἐπιταγμάτων συμπεφορημένας ὄρυξι καὶ δικέλλαις ταῖς πληκτικαῖς τῶν μαθημάτων διδασκαλίαις ἐξεκάθηρέν τε καὶ ἀπέσμηξεν, λαμπρόν τε καὶ διαυγῆ τῆς πάντων ὑμῶν διανοίας τὸν χῶρον ἀπειργασμένος, ἐνταῦθα λοιπὸν τῷ πανσόφῳ καὶ θεοφιλεῖ τῷδε παραδέδωκεν ἡγεμόνι·
 ὃς τά τε ἄλλα κριτικὸς καὶ ἐπιλογιστικὸς τυγχάνων τήν <τε> τῶν αὐτῷ ψυχῶν εὖ διαγινώσκων καὶ φυλοκρινῶν διάνοιαν, ἐκ πρώτης ὡς εἰπεῖν ἡμέρας οἰκοδομῶν οὔπω καὶ εἰς δεῦρο πέπαυται, τοτὲ μὲν διαυγῆ τὸν χρυσόν, τοτὲ δὲ δόκιμον καὶ καθαρὸν τὸ ἀργύριον καὶ τοὺς τιμίους καὶ πολυτελεῖς λίθους ἐν πᾶσιν ὑμῖν ἁρμόττων, ὡς ἱερὰν αὖθις καὶ μυστικὴν ἔργοις τοῖς εἰς ὑμᾶς ἀποπληροῦν προφητείαν, δι’ ἦς εἴρηται ἰδοὺ ἐγὼ ἑτοιμάζω ἀοῖ ἄνθρακα τὸν λίθον ἀοῦ καὶ τὰ θεμέλιά σου σάπφειρον καὶ τὰς ἐπάλξεις ἀοῦ ἴασπιν καὶ τὰς πύλας σου λίθους κρυστάλλου καὶ τὸν περίβολόν ἀοῦ λίθους ἐκλεκτοὺς καὶ πάντας τοὺς υἱούς ἀοῦ διδακτοὺς θεοῦ καὶ ἐν πολλῇ εἰρήνῃ τὰ τέκνα ἀοῦ·
 καὶ ἐν δικαιοσύνῃ οἰκοδομηθήσῃ.
 First, then, choosing unto Himself the souls of the upreme Emperors, by meansof these men most dearly beloved οf God Ηe cleansed the whole world of all wickedand baneful persons and of the cruel God- hating tyrants themselves.
 Αnd then men that wereΗis disciples,who all their life long had been consecratedto Ηim,yet secretly concealed, as ina storm οf evils, by Ηis sheltering care, these Ηe brought out openly and honoured worthily with the great gifts οf His Father's bounty.
 Αnd by their means Ηe once more purified and cleansed with pickaxes and mattocks, namely,the penetrating teachingsοfΗis instruction, those souls whicha short time before had been befouled and overlaid with every sort οf matter and rubbish contained in impious decrees;
 and when Ηe had made bright and clear the place of the understanding of allof you, Ηe then for the future consigned it to this all- wise and God- beloved ruler.
 Ηe, discerning and as he isin an else, distinguisheth also and discerneth the understanding of the souls committed to his charge;
 and from the first day, so to speak, even unto now he hath never ceased to build, and among you all to fit into its place, at one timethe radiant gold, at another the approved and purified silver and the precious and costly stones;
 so as οnce moreto fulfil in his deedsto you- ward the sacred and mystic prophecy, in whichit hath been said:
 ‘ ΒeholdI prepare for thee thy stoneοf carbuncle, and thy foundations of sapphire, and thybattlements οf jasper, and thy gates οf crystals, and thy wall of choice stones, and all thy sons taught of God, and in great peace thy children:
 and in righteousness shalt thou be built.
 '“ Δικαιοσύνῃ δῆτα οἰκοδομῶν, κατ’ ἀξίαν τοῦ παντὸς λαοῦ διῄρει τὰς δυνάμεις, οἷς μὲν τὸν ἔξωθεν αὐτὸ μόνον περιφράττων περίβολον, τὴν ἀπλανῆ πίστιν περιτειχίσας( πολὺς δὲ ὁ καὶ μέγας λεώς, οὐδὲν κρεῖττον φέρειν οἰκοδόμημα διαρκῶν), οἷς δὲ τὰς ἐπὶ τὸν οἶκον ἐπιτρέπων εἰσόδους, θυραυλεῖν καὶ ποδηγεῖν τοὺς εἰσιόντας κατατάττων, οὐκ ἀπεικότως τοῦνεὼ πρόπυλα νενομισμένους, ἄλλους δὲ πρώτοις τοῖς ἔξωθεν ἀμφὶ τὴν αὐλὴν ἐκ τετραγώνου κίοσιν ὑπεστήριξεν, ταῖς πρώταις τῶν τεττάρων εὐαγγελίων τοῦ γράμματος προσβολαῖς ἐμβιβάζων·
 τοὺς δ’ ἤδη ἀμφὶ τὸν βασίλειον οἶκον ἑκατέρωσε παραζεύγνυσιν, ἔτι μὲν κατηχουμένους καὶ ἐν αὔξη καὶ προκοπῇ καθεατῶτας, οὐ μὴν πόρρω που καὶ μακρὰν τῆς τῶν ἐνδοτάτω θεοπτίας τῶν πιστῶν διεζενγμένους.
 ἐκ δὴ τούτων τὰς ἀκηράτους ψυχὰς θείῳ λουτρῷ χρυσοῦ δίκην ἀποσμηχθείσας παραλαβών, κἀνταῦθα τοὺς μὲν κίοσιν τῶν ἐξωτάτω πολὺ κρείττοσιν ἐκ τῶν ἐνδοτάτω μυστικῶν τῆς γραφῆς δογμάτων ὑποστηρίξει, τοῖς δὲ πρὸς τὸ φῶς ἀνοίγμασιν ὑποστηρίζει, προπύλῳ μὲν ἑνὶ μεγίστῳ τῆς τοῦ παμβασιλέως ἑνὸς καὶ μόνου θεοῦ δοξολογίας τὸν πάντα νεὼν κατακοσμῶν, Χριστοῦ δὲ καὶ ἁγίου πνεύματος παρ’ ἑκάτερα τῆς τοῦ πατρὸς αὐθεντίας τὰς δευτέρας αὐγὰς τοῦ φωτὸς παρασχόμενος·
 τῶν τε λοιπῶν διὰ τοῦ παντὸς οἴκου ἄφθονον καὶ πολὺ διάφορον τῆς καθ’ ἕκαστον ἀληθείας τὸ σαφὲς καὶ φωτεινὸν ἐνδεικνύμενος, πάντῃ δὲ καὶ πανταχόθεν τοὺς ζῶντας καὶ βεηκότας“ Building verilyin righteousness,1 he duly divided the whole people according to their several abilities;
 with some he fenced the outer enclosure and this alone, surrounding it witha wall of unerring faith( and thiswasthe great multitudeofthe people who were unable to supporta mightier structure);
 to others he entrusted the entrances to the house, setting them to haunt the doors and guide the steps of those entering, wherefore they have not unnaturally been reckoned as gateways of the temple;
 he supported with the first outer pillars that are about the quadrangular courtyard, bringing them to their first acquaintance with the letter of the four Gospels.
 Others he joineth closely to the royal house on either side, still indeed under instruction and in the stage of progressing and advancing, yet not far off nor greatly separated from the faithful who possess the divine vision of that which is innermost.
 Taking from the number of these last the pure souls that have been cleansed like gold by the divine washing, he then supporteth some of them with pillars much greater than the outermost, from the innermost mystic teachings of the Scriptures, while others he illumineth with apertures towards the light.
 The whole temple he adorneth witha single, mighty gateway, even the praise of the οneandonly God, the universal King;
 and on either side of the Father's sovereign power he provideth the secondary beams of the light of Christ and the Ηoly Spirit.
 Αs to the rest, throughout the whole house he showeth in an abundant and much varied manner the clearness and splendour of the truth that is in each one, in that everywhere and from every source he hath included the living and firmly set and καὶ εὐπαγεῖς τῶν ψυχῶν λίθους ἐγκρίνας, τὸν μέγαν καὶ βασιλικὸν ἐξ ἁπάντων οἶκον ἐπισκευάζεται λαμπρὸν καὶ φωτὸς ἔμπλεω τά τε ἔνδοθεν καὶ τὰ ἐκτός, ὅτι μὴ ψυχὴ μόνον καὶ διάνοια, καὶ τὸ σῶμα δὲ αὐτοῖς ἁγνείας καὶ σωφροσύνης πολυανθεῖ κόσμῳ κατηγλάϊσιο.
“ Ἔνεισιν δ’ ἐν τῷδε τῷ ἱερῷ καὶ θρόνοι βάθρα τε μυρία καὶ καθιστήρια, ἐν ὅσαις ψυχαῖς τὰ τοῦ θείου πνεύματος ἐφιζάνει δωρήματα, οἷα καὶ πάλαι ὤφθη τοῖς ἀμφὶ τοὺς ἱεροὺς ἀποστόλους, οἷς ἐφάνησαν διαμεριζόμεναι γλῶσσαι ὡς εἰ πυρὸς ἀκάθισέν τε ἐφ’ ἕνα ἕκαστον αὐτῶν.
 ἀλλ’ ἐν μὲν τῷ πάντων ἄρχοντι ἴσως αὐτὸς ὅλος ἐγκάθηται χριστός, ἐν δὲ τοῖς μετ’ αὐτὸν δευτερεύουσιν ἀναλόγως, καθ’ ὅαον ἕκαστος χωρεῖ, Χριστοῦ δυνάμεως καὶ πνεύματος ἁγίου μερισμοῖς.
 βάθρα δ’ ἂν εἶεν καὶ ἀγγέλων αἱ τινῶν φυχαὶ τῶν εἰς παιδαγωγίαν καὶ φρουρὰν ἑκάστῳ παραδεδομένων, σεμνὸν δὲ καὶ μέγα καὶ μονογενὲς θυσιαστήριον ποῖον ἂν εἴη ἢ τῆς τοῦ κοινοῦ πάντων ἱερέως τῆς ψυχῆς τὸ εἰλικρινὲς καὶ ἁγίων ἅγιον;
 ᾧ παρεστὼς ἐπὶ δεξιᾷ ὁ μέγας τῶν ὅλων ἀρχιερεὺς αὐτὸς Ἰησοῦς, ὁ μονογενὴς τοῦ θεοῦ, τὸ παρὰ πάντων εὐῶδες θυμίαμα καὶ τὰς δι’ εὐχῶν ἀναίμους καὶ ἀύλους θυσίας φαιδρῷ τῷ βλέμματι καὶ ὑπτίαις ὑποδεχόμενος χερσὶν τῷ κατ’ οὐρανὸν πατρὶ καὶ θεῷ τῶν ὅλων παραπέμπεται, πρῶτος αὐτὸς προσκυνῶν καὶ μόνος τῷ πατρὶ τὸ κατ’ ἀξίαν ἀπονέμων well- wrought stonesof men's souls.
 Thus he builded the great and royal house composedof all, bright and full of light both within and without;
 for not alone soul and mind, but even their body had been made glorious with the many- blossomed adornment οf chastity and sobriety.
“ Νow there are also in this fane thrones and countless benches and seats, as manvasare the souls on which the gifts of the divine Spirit find their restingplace;
 such as long ago appeared to the sacred Apostles and those that were with them, to whom there were manifested tongues parting asunder, like as of fire;
 and it sat upon each one of them.
 But while in the rulerof all,as is right, the entire Christ hathtaken Ηis seat, in those who have the second place after him this bountyis proportioned to each one's capacity,by gifts of the power of Christ and of the Ηoly Ghost.
 Αnd the souls of some might be the seatsevenof angels,of of those to whom the instructionand guarding of each several person hath been committed.
 But as to the reverend, mighty and unique altar, what might it be save the spotless holy of holies of the common priest of all?1 Standing besideit on the right handthe great High Ρriest of the universe, even Jesus, the only- begotten of receiveth with joyful countenance and uptunrned hands the sweet- smelling incense from all, and bloodless and immaterial sacrificesofferedin prayer,and sendeth them on their way to the heavenly Father and God of the universe;
 Whom He Himself first adoreth and alone rendereth to His Father the honour that is due;
 after which Ηe also beseecheth σέβας, εἶτα δὲ καὶ πᾶσιν ἡμῖν εὐμενῆ διαμένειν καὶ δεξιὸν εἰς ἀεὶ παραιτούμενος.
 “ Τοιοῦτος ὁ μέγας νεὼς ὃν καθ’ ὅλης τῆς ὑφ’ ἥλιον οἰκουμένης ὁ μέγας τῶν ὅλων δημιουργὸς λόγος αυνεατήσατο, τῶν ἐπέκεινα οὐρανίων ἁψίδων πάλιν καὶ αὐτὸς νοερὰν ταύτην ἐπὶ γῆς εἰκόνα κατεργασάμενος, ὡς ἂν διὰ πάσης τῆς κτίσεως τῶν τε ἐπὶ γῆς λογικῶν ζῴων ὁ πατὴρ αὐτῷ τιμῷτό τε καὶ σέβοιτο.
 τὸν δὲ ὑπερουράνιον χῶρον καὶ τὰ ἐκεῖαε τῶν τῇδε παραδείγματα τήν τε ἄνω λεγομένην Ἰερουααλὴμ καὶ τὸ Σιὼν ὄρος τὸ ἐπουράνιον καὶ τὴν ὑπερκόσμιον πόλιν τοῦ ζῶντος θεοῦ, ἐν ᾖ μυριάδες ἀγγέλων πανηγύρεις καὶ ἐκκλησία πρωτοτόκων ἀπογεγραμμένων ἐν οὐρανοῖς ταῖς ἀρρήτοις καὶ ἀνεπιλογίστοις ἡμῖν θεολογίαις τὸν σφῶν ποιητὴν καὶ πανηγεμόνα τῶν ὅλων γεραίρουαιν, οὔτις θνητὸς οἷός τε κατ’ ἀξίαν ὑμνῆσαι, ὅτι δὴ ὀφθαλμὸς οὐκ εἶδεν καὶ οὖς οὐκ ἤκουσεν καὶ ἐπὶ καρδίαν ἀνθρώπου οὐκ ἀνέβη αὐτὰ δὴ ταῦτα ἃ ἡτοίμασεν ὁ θεὸς τοῖς ἀγαπῶαιν αὐτόν·
 ὧν ἤδη ἐν μέρει καταξιωθέντες, ἄνδρες ἅμα παισὶν καὶ γυναιξίν, αμικροὶ καὶ μεγάλοι, πάντες ἀθρόως ἐν ἑνὶ πνεύματι καὶ μιᾷ ψυχῇ μὴ διαλίπωμεν ἐξομολογούμενοι καὶ τοσούτων ἡμῖν ἀγαθῶν παραίτιον ἀνευφημοῦντες, τὸν εὐιλατεύοντα πάσαις ταῖς ἀνομίαις ἡμῶν, τὸν ἰώμενον πάσας τὰς νόσους ἡμων, τὸν λυτρούμενον ἐκ φθορᾶς τὴν ζωὴν ἡμῶν, τὸν στεφανοῦντα ἡμᾶς ἐν ἐλέει καὶ οἰκτιρμοῖς, τὸν ἐμπιμπλῶντα ἐν ἀγαθοῖς τὴν ἐπιθυμίαν ἡμῶν, ὅτι οὐ κατὰ τὰς ἁμαρτίας ἡμῶν ἐποίησεν ἡμῖν οὐδὲ κατὰ τὰς ἀνομίας ἡμῶν ἀνταπέδωκεν ἡμῖν, ὅτι καθ’ ὅσον ἀπέχουσιν Him to remain favourable and propitious toward us all for ever.
“ Such is the great temple which the Word, the great Creator of the universe, hath builded throughout the whole world beneath the sun, forming again this spiritual image upon earth of those vaults beyond the vaults of heaven;
 so that bythe whole creationandby the rational, living creatures upon earth His Father might be honoured and revered.
 But as for the region above the heavens and the models there of things onthis earth, and the Jerusalem thatis above,as it is called, and the mount Ζion the heavenly mount, and the supramundane city of the living God, in which innumerable hosts of angels in general assembly and the church οf the firstborn who are enrolled in heaven honour their Maker and the Sonereign of the universe, proclaiming Ηis praises in unutterable words of which we cannot conceive:
 these no mortal man can worthily hymn, for in truth eye saw not, and ear heard not, nor did there enter into the heart of man those same things which God prepared for them that love Ηim.
 Of these things now in part deemed worthy, let usall together,men with women and children, small and great, with one spirit and one soul, never ceaseto praise and acclaim Him whois the Αuthor of so great blessingsto us;
 who is very merciful to all our iniquities, who healeth all our diseases, who redeemeth our life from destruction, who crowneth us with mercyand pities,who satisfieth our desire with good things;
 for Ηe hath not dealt with us after our sins, nor rewarded us after ἀνατολαὶ ἀπὸ δυσμῶν, ἐμάκρυνεν ἀφ’ ἡμῶν τὰς ἀνομίας ἡμῶν·
 καθὼς οἰκτείρει πατὴρ υἱοὺς αὐτοῦ, ῷκτείρησεν κύριος τοὺς φοβουμένους αὐτόν.
 “ Ταῦτα καὶ νῦν καὶ εἰς τὸν ἑξῆς ἅπαντα χρόνον ταῖς μνήμαις ἀναζωπυροῦντες, ἀτὰρ καὶ τῆς παρούσης πανηγύρεως καὶ τῆς φαιδρᾶς ταύτης καὶ λαμπροτάτης ἡμέρας τὸν αἴτιον καὶ πανηγυριάρχην νύκτωρ καὶ μεθ’ ἡμέραν διὰ πάσης ὥρας καὶ δι’ ὅλης ὡς εἰπεῖν ἀναπνοῆς ἐν νῷ προορώμενοι, στέργουτες καὶ σέβοντες ψυχῆς ὅλῃ δυνάμει, καὶ νῦν ἀναστάντες μεγάλη διαθέσεως φωνῇ καθικετύσωμεν, ὡς ἂν ὑπὸ τὴν αὐτοῦ μάνδραν ἐς τέλος ἡμᾶς σκεπάζων διασῴζοιτο, τὴν παρ’ αὐτοῦ βραβεύων ἀρραγῆ καὶ ἄσειστον αἰωνίαν εἰρήνην ἐν Χριστῷ Ἰησοῦ τῷ σωτῆρι ἡμῶν, δι’ οὗ αὐτῷ ἡ δόξα εἰς τοὺς σύμπαντας αἰῶνας τῶν αἰώνων.
 ἀμήν.
” V.
 Φέρε δή, λοιπὸν καὶ τῶν βασιλικῶν διατάξεων Κωνσταντίνου καὶ Λικιννίου τὰς ἐκ τῆς ῾Ρωμαίων φωνῆς μεταληφείσας ἑρμηνείας παραθώμεθα.
 ΑΝΤΙΓΡΑΦΟΝ ΒΑΣΙΛΙΚΩΝ ΔΙΑΤΑΞΕΩΝ ΕΚ ΡΩΜΑΙΚΗΣ ΓΛΩΤΤΗΣ ΜΕΤΑΛΗΦΘΕΙΣΩΝ“ Ἤδη μὲν πάλαι σκοποῦντες τὴν ἐλευθερίαν τῆς θρῃσκείας οὐκ ἀρνητέαν εἶναι, ἀλλ᾿ ἑνὸς ἑκάστου τῇ διανοίᾳ καὶ τῇ βουλήσει ἐξουσίαν δοτέον τοῦ τὰ θεῖα πράγματα τημελεῖν κατὰ τὴν αὐτοῦ προ- our iniquities;
 for as far as the eastisfrom the west, far hath Ηe removed οur iniquities from us.
 Likea father pitiethhis sons,so the Lord pitied themt fear Him.
 ‘‘ Let us rekindle the memories οf these things both now and for all time hereafter;
 yea, and let us keep our minds night and day, through every and, one might say, in every breath, the Αuthor the present assembly, and thishappy and mostlorious day, even the Ruler of the assembly Himself;
 let us cherish and revere Him with the whole wer οf our soul;
 and now let us rise and beseechin loud accents,as befitteth our earnest desire, at atHewould shelter and preserve usto the endinis fold, and award us that eternal peace, unbroken undisturbed, which comethcometh from Him, in Christ esus our Saviour, through whomto Him be gloryforer and ever.
” V.
 But come, let usnow quote also the translations made from the Latin of the imperial ordinances of nstantine and Licinus.
 Copy of Imperial Ordinances translated from the Latin tongue.
 1 In our watchfulness in days gone by that freedomf worship should not be denied, but that each οne rding to his mind and purpose should have uthority given him to care for divine things in the αίρεσιν ἕκαστον, κεκελεύκειμεν τοῖς τε Χριστιανοῖς.
.
.
 τῆς αἱρέσεως καὶ τῆς θρῃσκείας τῆς ἑαυτῶν τὴν πίστιν φυλάττειν·
 ἀλλ’ ἐπειδὴ πολλαὶ καὶ διάφοροι αἱρέσεις ἐν ἐκείνη τῆ ἀντιγραφὴ, ἐν ἦ τοῖς αὐτοῖς συνεχωρήθη ἡ τοιαύτη ἐξουσία, ἐδόκουν προστεθεῖσθαι σαφῶς, τυχὸν ἴσως τινὲς αὐτῶν μετ’ ὀλίγον ἀπὸ τῆς τοιαύτης παραφυλάξεως ἀπεκρούοντο.
“ Ὁπότε εὐτυχῶς ἐγὼ Κωνσταντῖνος ὁ Αὔγουστος κἀγὼ Δικίννιος ὁ Αὔγουστος ἐν τῆ Μεδιολάνῳ ἐγηλύθειμεν καὶ πάντα ὅσα πρὸς τὸ λυσιτελὲς καὶ τὸ χρήσιμον τῷ κοινῷ διέφερεν, ἐν ζητήσει ἔσχομεν, ταῦτα μεταξὺ τῶν λοιπῶν ἅτινα ἐδόκει ἐν πολλοῖς ἅπασιν ἐπωφελῆ εἶναι, μᾶλλον δὲ ἐν πρώτοις διατάξαι ἐδογματίσαμεν, οἷς ἡ πρὸς τὸ θεῖον αἰδώς τε καὶ τὸ ἐνείχετο, ἐνείχετο, τοῦτ’ ἔστιν, ὅπως δῶμεν καὶ τοῖς χριστιανοῖς καὶ πᾶσιν ἐλευθέραν αἵρεσιν τοῦ ἀκολουθεῖν τῆ θρησκείᾳ ᾖδ’ ἂν βουληθῶσιν, ὅπως ὅ τί ποτέ ἐστιν θειότητος καὶ οὐρανίου πράγματος, ἡμῖν καὶ πᾶσι τοῖς ὑπὸ τὴν ἡμετέραν ἐξουσίαν διάγουσιν εὐμενὲς εἶναι δυνηθῇ.
 τοίνυν ταύτην τὴν ἡμετέραν βούλησιν ὑγιεινῷ καὶ ὀρθοτάτῳ λογισμῷ ἐσογματίασμεν, ὅπως μηδενὶ παντελῶς ἐξουσία ἀρνητέα ἧ τοῦ ἀκολουθεῖν καὶ αἱρεῖσθαι τὴν τῶν Χριστιανῶν παραφύλαξιν ἢ θρῃσκείαν ἑκάστῳ τε ἐξουσία δοθείη τοῦ διδόναι ἑαυτοῦ τὴν διάνοιαν ἐν ἐκείνῃ τῆ θρῃσκείαᾳ, ἢν αὐτὸς ἑαυτῷ ἁρμόζειν νομίζει, ὅπως ἡμῖν δυνηθῇ τὸ θεῖον ἐν πᾶσι τὴν ἔθιμον σπουδὴν καὶ καλοκἀγαθίαν παρέχειν·
 ἅτινα οὕτως ἀρέσκειν ἡμῖν ἀντιγραφαὶ ἀκόλουθον ἢν, ἵν’ ἀφαιρεθεισῶν παντελῶςway that pleasedhim best, we had given orders that th to the Christians and toallothers liberty should allowed1 to keeptothe faith of their οwn sectd worship.
 But inasmuch as many and various conitions2 seemed clearly to have been addedin that reipt, in which such rights were conceded to the same rsons,it may be that perchaneesome of them were ortly afterwards repelled from such observance.
 “ WhenI Constantine Αugustus andI Lincinius gustus had come under happy auspices to Milan,d discussed all matters that concemed the public vantage and good, among the other things that eemed to be of benefit to the many 3—or rather, first and foremost— we resolved to make sueh decrees should secure respect and reverenee for the Deity Deity;
 namely, to grant both to the Christians and to all free choice of following whatever form οf worship ey pleased, to the intent that all the dirine and eavenly powers that be might be favourable to usd all those living under our authority.
 Therefore with sound and most upright reasoning we resolved this4 counsel:
 that authority be refused to no οne homsoever to follow and choose the observanee or rm of worship that Christians use, and that authoritye granted to each one to give his mind to that formf worship whichhe deems sritableto himself, toe intent thattheDininity 5.
.
.
 may in all things ord us his wonted care and generosity.
 It was omitting to senda rescript that thisisοur pleasure,in er that whenthose conditions had altogether been τῶν αἱρέσεων, αἵτινες τοῖς προτέροις ἡμῶν γράμμασι τοῖς πρὸς τὴν σὴν καθοσίωσιν ἀποσταλεῖσι περὶ τῶν χριστιανῶν ἐνείχοντο καὶ ἅτινα πάνυ σκαιὰ καὶ τῆς ἡμετέρας πραότητος ἀλλότρια εἶναι ἐδόκει, ταῦτα ὑφαιρεθῇ καὶ νῦν ἐλευθέρως καὶ ἁπλῶς ἕκαστος αὐτῶν τῶν τὴν αὐτὴν προαίρεσιν ἐσχηκότων τοῦ φυλάττειν τὴν τῶν Χριστιανῶν θρησκείαν ἄνευ τινὸς ὀχλήσεως τοῦτο αὐτὸ παραφυλάττοι.
 ἅτινα τῆ σῇ ἐπιμελείᾳ πληρέστατα δηλῶσαι ἐδογματίσαμεν, ὅπως εἰδείης ἡμᾶς ἐλευθέραν καὶ ἀπολελυμένην ἐξουσίαν τοῦ τημελεῖν τὴν ἑαυτῶν θρῃσκείαν τοῖς αὐτοῖς Χριστιανοῖς δεδωκέναι.
 ὅπερ ἐπειδὴ ἀπολελυμένως αὐτοῖς ὑφ’ ἡμῶν δεδωρῆσθαι θεωρεῖς, <συνορᾷ> ἡ σὴ καὶ ἑτέροις δεδόσθαι ἐξουσίαν τοῖς βουλομένοις τοῦ μετέρχεσθαι τὴν παρατήρησιν καὶ θρησκείαν ἑαυτῶν ὅπερ ἀκολούθως τῇ ἡσυχίᾳ τῶν ἡμετέρων καιρῶν γίνεσθαι φανερόν ἐστιν, ὅπως ἐξουσίαν ἕκαστος ἔχῃ τοῦ αἱρεῖσθαι καὶ τημελεῖν ὁποίανδ’ ἂν βούληται τὸ θεῖον.
 τοῦτο δὲὑφ’ ἡμῶν μέγονεν, ὅπως μηδεμιᾷ τιμῇ μηδὲ θρῃσκείᾳ τινὶ μεμειῶσθαί τι ὑφ’ ἡμῶν δοκοίη.
” καὶ τοῦτο δὲ πρὸς τοῖς λοιποῖς εἰς τὸ πρόσωπον τῶν χριστιανῶν δογματίζομεν, ἵνα τοὺς τόπους αὐτῶν, εἰς οὓς τὸ πρότερον συνέρχεσθαι ἔθος ἢν αὐτοῖς, περὶ ὧν καὶ τοῖς πρότερον δοθεῖσιν πρὸς τὴν δὴν καθοσίνσιν γράμμασιν τύπος ἕτερος ἧν ὡρισμένος τῷ προτέρῳ χρόνῳ, ἵν’ εἴ τινες παρὰ τοῦ ταμείου τοῦ ἡμετέρου ἢ παρά τινος ἑτέρου φαίνοιντο ἠγορακότες, τούτους τοῖς αὐτοῖς Χριστιανοῖς ἄνευ ἀργυρίου καὶ ἄνευ τινὸς moved, which were contained in our former letters nt to thy Devotedness, concerningthe Christians,οse things also which seemed to be wholly unfortute and foreign to our clemency mightbe removed,d that now eachone of thosewhowere possessed the same purpose— namely, to observe istians’ form οf worship—should ry thing,freely and simply, without any hindrance.
 ich things we have resolved, to signify in the est manner to thy Carefulness, to the intent thatu mayest know that we havegranted to thesee Christians free and unrestrictedauthorityto erve theirown form of worship.
 Αnd when thou rceivest that this has been granted unrestrictedly themby us, thy Devotedness will understand at authority has been givento others also, whohto follow their own observance and form of rship—a thing clearly suited to the our times— so that eachonemay have chooseand observe whatever form he pleases.
 is has beendone by us, to the intent that we would not seem to have detraeted inany way fromy rith2 or form of worship.
“ Αnd this, moreover, with special regard to the istians,we resolve:
 That their places, at whichwas their formerwont to assemble, coneerning ich also in the former letter dispatched to thy evotedness a definite ordinance 3 had been formerly d down, if any should appear to have bought them ther from our treasury οr from any οther source — at these they should restore to these same ristians without payment οr any demand for compensation.
 ἀπαιτήαεως τῆς τιμῆς, ὑπερτεθείσης δίχα πάsης ἀμελείας καὶ ἀμφιβολίας, ἀποκαταστήαωαι, καὶ εἴ τινες κατὰ δῶρον τυγχάνουσιν εἰληφότες, τοὺς αὐτοὺς τόπους ὅπως ἢ τοῖς αὐτοῖς Χριστιανοῖς τὴν ταχίατην ἀποκαταστήσωσιν οὕτως ὡς ἢ οἱ ἠγορακότες τοὺς αὐτοὺς τόπους ἢ οἱ κατὰ δωρεὰν εἰληφότες αἰτῶαί τι παρὰ τῆς ἡμετέρας καλοκἀγαθίας προσέλθωαι τῷ ἐπὶ τόπων ἐπάρχῳ δικάζοντι, ὅπως καὶ αὐτῶν διὰ τῆς ἡμετέρας χρηστότητος πρόνοια γένηται.
 ἅτινα πάντα τῷ σώματι τῷ τῶν Χριστιανῶν παρ’ αὐτὰ διὰ τῆς σῆς σπουδῆς ἄνευ τινὸς παρολκῆς παραδίδοσθαι δεήσει.
 “ Καὶ ἐπειδὴ οἱ αὐτοὶ Χριατιανοὶ οὐ μόνον ἐκείνους εἰς οὓς αυνέρχεσθαι ἔθος εἶχον, ἀλλὰ καὶ ἑτέρους τόπους ἐσχηκέναι γινώσκονται διαφέροντας οὐ πρὸς ἕκαστον αὐτῶν, ἀλλὰ πρὸς τὸ δίκαιον τοῦ αὐτῶν σώματος, τοῦτ᾿ ἔστιν τῶν Χριατιανῶν, ταῦτα πάντα ἐπὶ τῷ νόμῳ ὃν προειρήκαμεν, δίχα παντελῶς τινος ἀμφισβητήσεως τοῖς αὐτοῖς Χριατιανοῖς, τοῦτ᾿ ἔστιν τῷ σώματι αὐτῶν καὶ τῇ συνόδῳ ἑκάστῳ αὐτῶν ἀποκαταατἠναι κελεύσεις τοῦ προειρημένου λογιαμοῦ δηλαδὴ φυλαχθέντος, ὅπως αὐτοὶ οἵτινες τοὺς αὐτοὺς ἄνευ τιμῆς, καθὼς προειρήκαμεν, ἀποκαθιατῶαι, τὸ ἀζήμιον τὸ ἑαυτῶν παρὰ τῆς ἡμετέρας καλοκἀγαθίας ἐλπίζοιεν.
“ Ἐν οἷς πᾶαιν τῷ προειρημένῳ σώματι τῶν Χριατιανῶν τὴν απουδὴν δυνατώτατα παρασχεῖν ὀφείλεις, ὅπως τὸ ἡμέτερον κέλευσμα τὴν ταχίστην παραπληρωθῇ, ὅπως καὶ ἐν τούτῳ διὰ τῆς ἡμετέρας χρηστότητος πρόνοια γένηται τῆς κοινῆς καὶ δημοσίας ἡσυχίας.
 τούτῳ γὰρ τῷ λογισμῷ, καθὼς καὶ προείρηται, ἡ θεία σπουδὴ περὶ ἡμᾶς, ἧς ἐν Setting aside all negligence and doubtfulness;
 and if any chanee to have received them by girt, that they should restore them them all speed to these same Christians:
 prorided that if either those who have purchased these same place or those who have received them by gift request aught of our generosity,let them approach the prefect of the district, 1 to the intent that through our Kindness thought may be taken for them also.
 Αll which things must be handed over to the corporation of the Christians by thy zealouscare immediately and without delay.
“ Αnd inasmuchas these same Christians had not only those places at whiehit was theirwontto assemble, but also are known to have had Other, belonging nottoindiniduals among them, but tothe lawful propertyof their corporation, that is,of the Christians, all these, under the provisions of the lawset forth above, thou wilt give orders to be restored without any question whatsoever to these same Christians, that is, to their corporation and assembly;
 provided always, of course,a aforesaid, that those persons who restoie the same without compensation, as we have mentioned above, may look for indemnification, as farasthey are concerned, from our generosity.
“ In all these things thou Shouldest use all the diligencein thy power for the above- mentioned corporationofthe Christians, that this our command may be fulfilled with all speed, so thatin this also,through our kindness, thought may be taken for the common and publie peace.
 For by this method, as we have also said before, the divine πολλοῖς ἤδη πράγμασιν ἀπεπειράθημεν, διὰ παντὸς τοῦ χρόνου βεβαίως διαμείναι, ἵνα δὲ ταύτης τῆς ἡμετέρας νομοθεσίας καὶ τῆς καλοκἀγαθίας ὁ ὅρος πρὸς γνῶσιν πάντων ἐνεχθῆναι δυνηθῇ, προταχθέντα τοῦ σοῦ προστάγματος ταῦτα τὰ ὑφ’ ἡμῶν γραφέντα πανταχοῦ προθεῖναι καὶ εἰς γνῶσιν πάντων ἀγαγεῖν ἀκόλουθόν ἐστιν, ὅπως ταύτης τῆς ἡμετέρας καλοκἀγαθίας ἡ νομοθεσία μηδένα λαθεῖν δυνηθῇ.
 ” ΑΝΤΙΓΡΑΦΟΝ ΕΤΕΡΑΣ ΒΑΣΙΛΙΚΗΣ ΔΙΑΤΑΞΕΩΣ ΗΝ ΑΥΘΙΣ ΠΕΠΟΙΗΤΑΙ, ΜOΝΗΙ ΤΗΙ ΚΑΘΟΛΙΚΗΙ ΕΚΚΛΗΣΙΑΙ ΤΗΝ ΔΩΡΕΑΝ ΔΕΔΟΣΘΑΙ ΥΠΟΣΗΜΗΝΑΜΕΝΟΣ“ Χαῖρε Ἀνυλῖωε, τιμιώτατε ἡμῖν.
 ἔστιν ὁ τρόπος οὗτος τῆς φιλαγαθίας τῆς ἡμετέρας, ὥστε ἐκεῖνα ἅπερ δικαίῳ ἀλλοτρίῳ προσήκει, μὴ μόνον μὴ ἐνοχλεῖσθαι, ἀλλὰ καὶ ἀποκαθιστᾶν βούλεσθαι ἡμᾶς, Ἀνυλῖωε τιμιώτατε.
 ὅθεν βουλόμεθα ἵν’, ὁπόταν ταῦτα τὰ γράμματα κομίσῃ, εἴ τινα ἐκ τούτων τῶν τῇ ἐκκλησίᾳ τῆ καθολικῇ τῶν Χριστιανῶν ἑκάσταις πόλεσιν ἢ καὶ ἄλλοις τόποις διέφερον καὶ κατέχοιντο νῦν ἢ ὑπὸ πολιτῶν ἢ ὑπό τινων ἄλλων, ταῦτα ἀποκατασταθῆναι παραχρῆμα ταῖς αὐταῖς ἐκκλησίαις ποιήσῃς, ἐπειδήπερ προῃρήμεθα ταῦτα ἅπερ αἱ αὐταὶ ἐκκλησίαι πρότερον ἐσχήκεσαν, τῷ δικαίῳ αὐτῶν ἀποκατασταθῆναι.
 ὁπότε τοίνυν συνορᾷ ἡ καθοσίωσις ἡ αὴ ταύτης ἡμῶν τῆς κελεύσεως σαφέστατον εἶναι τὸ πρόσταγμα, σπούδασον, εἴτε κῆποι εἴτε οἰκίαι care for us, which we have already experienced in many matters, will remain stedfast1.
.
.
 continually.
 Αnd that the form which this our enactment and generosity takes maybe brought to the knowledgeοf all,it is fitting that this which we have writtenbeset forth bythy orderandpublished everywhere,and broughttothe knowledgeof all, to the intent that the enactment which embodies this our gnerosity may escape the notice οf no οne. ’
’ Copy of another Imperial Ordinance which he also made, indicating that the bounty had been granted to the Catholic Church alone.
‘‘ Greeting, Anulinus,our most honoured Sir.
 It is the customof οur benevolence, that we will that whatsoever appertains by right to another should not only not suffer harm, but evenbe restored, most honoured Anulinus.
 Wherefore we will that, when thoureceivest this lerter, if aught of those things that belonged to the catholic Church 2 of the Christians in any city, or even in other plaees, be now in the possession either of citizens or οf any οthers:
 these thou shouldest cause to be restored forthwith to these same churches, inasmueh asit has been our determination that those things which these same churches possessed formerly should be restored to them as their right.
 Since, therefore,thy Devotedness perceives that the order of this our command is most explicit, do thy diligence that εἶθ’ ὁτιουνδήποτε τῷ δικαίῳ τῶν αὐτῶν ἐκκλησιῶν διέφερον, σύμπαντα αὐταῖς ἀποκατασταθῆναι ὡς τάχιστα, ὅπως τούτῳ ἡμῶν τῷ προστάγματι ἐπιμεΛεστάτην σε πειθάρχησιν παρεσχηκέναι καταμάθοιμεν.
 ἔρρωσο, Ἀνυλῖνε, τιμιώτατε καὶ ποθεινότατε ἡμῖν.
” ΑΝΤΙΓΡΑΦΟΝ ΒΑΣΙΛΙΚΗΣ ΕΠΙΣΤΟΛΗΣ ΣΙ’ ΗΣ ΣΥΝΟΔΟΝ ΕΠΙΣΚΟΠΩΝ ΕΠΙ ΡΩΜΗΣ ΚΕΛΕΥΕΙ ΓΕΝΕΣΘΑΙ ΥΠΕΡ ΤΗΣ ΤΩΝ ΕΚΚΛΗΣΙΩΝ ΕΝΩΣΕΩΣ ΤΕ ΚΑΙ ΟΜΟΝΟΤΑΣ “ Κωνσταντῖνος Σεβαστὸς Μιλτιάδη ἐπισκόπῳ Ῥωμαίων καὶ Μάρκῳ.
 ἐπειδὴ τοιοῦτοι χάρται παρὰ Ἁνυλίνου τοῦ λαμπροτάτου ἀνθυπάτου τῆς Αφρικῆς πρός με πλείους ἀπεστάλησαν, ἐν οἷς ἐμφέρεται Καικιλιαὸν τὸν ἐπίσκοπον τῆς Χαρταγενησίων πόλεως παρά τινων καλλήγων αὐτοῦ τῶν κατὰ τὴν Ἀφρικὴν καθεστώτων ἐν πολλοῖς πράγμασιν εὐθύνεσθαι, καὶ τοῦτό μοι βαρὺ σφόδρα δοκεῖ τὸ ἐν ταύταις ταῖς ἐπαρχίαις, ἃς τῇ ἐμῇ καθοσιώσει αὐθαιρέτως ἡ θεία πρόνοια ἐνεχείρισεν κἀκεῖσε πολὺ πλῆθος λαοῦ, ὄχλον ἐπὶ τὸ φαυλότερον ἐπιμένοντα εὑρίσκεσθαι ὡς ἂν εἰ διχοστατοῦντα καὶ μεταξὺ ἐπισκόπους διαφορὰς ἔχειν, ἔδοξέ μοι ἵν’ αὐτὸς ὁ Καικιλιανὸς μετὰ δέκα ἐπισκόπων τῶν αὐτὸν εὐθύνειν δοκούντων καὶ δέκα ἑτέρων οὓς αὐτὸς τῆ ἑαυτοῦ δίκη ἀναγκαίους ὑπολάβοι, εἰς τὴν Ῥώμην πλῷ ἀπιέναι, ἵν’ ἐκεῖσε ὑμῶν παρόντων, ἀλλὰ μὴν καὶ Ῥετικόυ καὶ Ματέρωου καὶ Μαρίνου, τῶν κολλήγων ὑμῶν, οὕς all things, whether gardensor buildings or whatsover belonged to these same churches by right, restored to them with all speed;
 so that wemaylearn that thou hast yielded the most careful obedience to this our order.
 Fare thee well, Anulinus, οur most honoured and esteemed Sir.
” Copy ofanImperial Letter,in which he commands holding ofa Synod of bishops at Rome οn behalf of the union and concord of the churches.
“ Constantine Augustus to Miltiades bishop of the, and to Mark.
 Inasmuch as documents of sucha nature have been sent to me in numbersby Anulinus, the right honourableproconsul of Africa,m which itappears that Caecilian,1 the bishop of the ity οf the Carthaginians,is called to aecount οn many charges by some of his colleagues in Africa;
d inasmuch as it seems to me to beavery serious tter thatinthose prorinces, which Dinine Pronience has chosen to entrustto my Denotedness, and where there is a great number of people, the ultitude shouldbe found pursring the worse coursef action, splitting up, as it were, and the bishops at ariance mnong themselves:
 it seemed good to met Caecilian himself, with ten bishops, who seem call him to account, and such ten others as he ay deem necessary to his suit, should setsail for me, that therea hearing maybe grantedhim in the presence of yourselves, and moreover οf Reticiusd Maternus and Marinus also, your colleagues aditor,i.
 e.
 had surrendered up the Scriptures to the pagan τούτου ἕνεκεν εἰς τὴν Ρώμην προσέταξα ἐπισπεῦσαι, δυνηθῇ ἀκουαθῆναι, ὡς ἂν καταμάθοιτε τῷ σεβασμιωτάτῳ νόμῳ ἁρμόττειν.
 ἵνα μέντοι καὶ περὶ πάντων αὐτῶν τούτων πληρεστάτην δυνηθῆτε ἔχειν γνῶσιν, τὰ ἀντίτυπα τῶν ἐγγράφων τῶν πρός με παρὰ Ἀνυλίνου ἀποσταλέντων γράμμασιν ἐμοῖς ὑποτάξας, πρὸς τοὺς προειρημένους κολλήγας ὑμῶν ἐξέπεμφα·
 οἷς ἐντυχοῦσα ἢ ὑμετέρα στερρότης δοκιμάσει ὅντινα χρὴ τρόπον τὴν προειρημένην δίκην ἐπιμελέστατα διευκρινῆσαι καὶ κατὰ τὸ δίκαιον τερματίσαι, ὁπότε μηδὲ τὴν ὑμετέραν ἐπιμέλειαν λανθάνει τοσαύτην με αἰδῶ τῇ ἐνθέαμῳ καθολικῇ ἐκκλησίᾳ ἀπονέμειν, ὡς μηδὲν καθόλου σχίσμα ἢ διχοστασίαν ἔν τινι τόπῳ βούλεσθαί με ὑμᾶς καταλιπεῖν.
 ἢ θειότης ὑμᾶς τοῦ μεγάλου θεοῦ διαφυλάξαι πολλοῖς ἔτεσὶ, τιμιώτατε.
” ΑΝTIΓΡΑΦΟΝ ΕΑΣΙΛΙKΗΣ ΕΠΙΣTΟΛΗΣΔΓ ΗΣ ΠΡOΣ.
 TΑTTΕΙ ΔΕΥTΕΡΑΝ ΓΕΝΕΣΘΑΙ ΣΥΝΟΔΟΝ ΥΠΕΡ TΟΥ ΠΑΣΑΝ TΩΝ ΕΠΙΣKΟΗΩΝ ΠΕΡIΕΛΕΙΝ ΔIXΟΣTΑΣΙΑΝ“ Kωναταντῖνος Σεβαστὸς χρήατῳ ἐπιακόπῳ Συρακουαίων.
 ἤδη μὲν πρότερον, ὅτε φαύλως καὶ ἐνδιαστρόφως τινὲς περὶ τῆς θρῃσκείας τῆς ἁγίας καὶ ἐπουρανίου δυνάμεως καὶ τῆς αἱρέσεως τῆς καθολικῆς ἀποδιίατασθαι ἤρξαντο, ἐπιτέμνεσθαι βουληθεὶς τὰς τοιαύτας αὐτῶν φιλονεικίας, οὕτω διατετυπώκειν ὥστε ἀποσταλέντων ἀπὸ τῆς Γαλλίας τινῶν ἐπισκόπων, ἀλλὰ μὴν καὶ τούτων κληθέντων ἀπὸ τῆς Ἀφρίκης τῶν ἐξ ἐναντίας( whomI have ordered to hasten to Rome for this purpose), in sucha manner as ye may perceive to be in accordance vith the most saered law.
 Nevertheless, that yemayhave the fullest knowledgeofall these same matters,I have subjoined to my letter copies οf the documents that were sent to me by Anulinus, and have dispatehed them to your afore said colleagues.
 Which when your Firmness reads, he will gauge by what method the most eareful investigation can be made of the above- mentioned suit, and a just deeision arrived at;
 since it does not escape the notice of your Carefulness that the respect whichI pay to the lawful Catholic Church is so great, that it is my wish thatye should leave no schism whatsoever or division in any plaee.
 Μay the divinity of the great God preserve1 you Safely for many years, most honoured Sirs.
 2’ ’ Copy ofan Imperial Letter, in which he gives orders for the holding of a second Synod for the purpose of removing all dinision among the bishops.
 “ Constantine Αugustus to Chrestus bishop of the Syracusans.
 Already ona former occasion, when someina base and perverse manner began to create divisions with regard to the worshipof the holyand heavenly Ρower and the Catholic religion, inmy desire to cut short such dissensions among them,I had given orders to the effect that certain bishops should be sent from Gaul, nay further, that the opposing parties, who were contending stubbornly μοίρας καταλλήλως, ἐνστατικῶς καὶ ἐπιμόνως διαγωνιζομένων παρόντος τε καὶ τοῦ τῆς Ῥώμης ἐπισκόπου, τοῦτο ὅπερ ἐδόκει κεκινῆσθαι, δυνηθῇ ὑπὸ τῆς παρουσίας αὐτῶν μετὰ πάσης ἐπιμελοῦς διακρίσεως κατορθώσεως τυχεῖν.
 ἀλλ’ ἐπειδή, ὡς συμβαίνει, ἐπιλαθόμενοί τινες καὶ τῆς σωτηρίας τῆς ἰδίας καὶ τοῦ σεβάσματος τοῦ ὀφειλομένου τῇ ἁγιωτάτη αἱρέσει, ἔτι καὶ νῦν τὰς ἰδίας ἔχθρας παρατείνειν οὐ παύονται, μὴ βουλόμενοι τῇ ἤδη παρατείνειν κρίσει συντίθεσθαι καὶ διοριζόμενοι ὅτι δὴ ἄρα ὀλίγοι τινὲς τὰς γνώμας καὶ τὰς ἀποφάσεις ἐξήνεγκαν ἢ καὶ μὴ πρότερον ἁπάντων τῶν ὀφειλόντων ζητηθῆναι ἀκριβῶς ἐξετασθέντων πρὸς τὸ τὴν κρίσιν ἐξενέγκαι πάνυ ταχέως καὶ ὀξέως ἔσπευσαν, ἔκ τε τούτων ἁπάντων ἐκεῖνα συμβαίνει γενέσθαι, τὸ καὶ τούτους αὐτοὺς ἀδελφικὴν καὶ ὁμόφονα ὀφείλοντας ἔχειν ὁμοψυχίαν αἰσχρῶς, μᾶλλον δὲ μυσερῶς ἀλλήλων ἀποδιεστάναι καὶ τοῖς ἀνθρώποις τοῖς ἀλλοτρίας ἔχουσι τὰς ψυχὰς ἀπὸ τῆς ἁγιωτάτης θρῃσκείας ταύτης πρόφασιν χλεύης διδόναι,— ὅθεν θὲν προνοητέον μοι ἐγένετο, ὅπως τοῦτο ὅπερ ἐχρῆν μετὰ τὴν ἐξενεχθεῖσαν ἤδη κρίσιν αὐθαιρέτῳ συγκαταθέσει πεπαῦσθαι, κἂν νῦν ποτε δυνηθῇ πολλῶν παρόντων τέλους τυχεῖν.
 ἐπειδὴ τοίνυν πλειστους ἐκ διαφόρων καὶ ἀμυθήτων τόπων ἐπισκόπους εἰς τὴν Ἀρελατησίων πόλιν εἴσω Καλανδῶν Αὐγούστων συνελθεῖν ἐκελεύσαμεν, καὶ ἀοῖ γραφαὶ ἐνομίσαμεν ἵνα λαβὼν παρὰ τοῦ λαμπροτάτου Λατρωνιανοῦ τοῦ κονρήκτορος Σικελίας δημόσιοί ὄχημα, συζεύξας σεαυτῷ καὶ δύο γέ τινας τῶν ἐκ and persistently together, should be sunnnoned from Africa;
 that so,inthe presence alsoof the bishopof Rome, this question which appeared to have been raised might through their comming receivea right solution by means οfa careful examinationin every particular.
 But since, as ithappens, some, forgetful both of their own salvation and the reverence they owe to their most holy religion, even now do not cease to perpetuate their private enmities, being unwilling to conform to the judgement already passed, affirming that after all it wasafew persons who gave their opinionsand decisions, or that theywere inahurry psss judgement very speedily and sharply without having first accurately examined all those matters that ought to have been investigated;
 and since, as a result of all this, it has cometo pass that eventhose very persons, who ought to be οf οne mindinbrotherly concord, are separate from each other ina disgraceful,nay ratherinan abominable, fashion,and give to those men whose souls are strangers to this most holy religion to scoff— wherefore it became incumbent upon me to provide that that which ought to have ceased by voluntary agreement, after the judgement akeady passed, may even now, if possible, be ended by the presence οf many persons.
 Inasmuch, therefore,as we have commanded that very many bishops from various and numberless places should assemble at the city of Arles by the Kalends of Αugust, we have thought it d to write to thee aho, that thou shouldest procurem the right honourable Latronianus, the “ corrector1” οf Sicily,a public vehicle, and joining to thy τοῦ δευτέρου θρόνου, οὕς ἂν σὺ αὐτὸς ἐπιλέξασθαι κρίνης, ἀλλὰ μὴν καὶ τρεῖς παῖδας τοὺς δυνησομένους ὑμῖν κατὰ τὴν ὁδὸν ὑπηρετήσασθαι παραλαβών, εἴσω τῆς αὐτῆς ἡμέρας ἐπὶ τῷ προειρημένῳ τόπῳ ἀπάντησον, ὡς ἂν διά τε τῆς τῆς σῆςρότητος καὶ διὰ τῆς λοιπῆς τῶν συνιόντων ὁμοψύχου καὶ ὁμόφρονος συνέσεως καὶ τοῦτο ὅπερ ἄχρι τοῦ δεῦρο φαύλως δι’ αἰσχράς τινας ζυγομαχίας παραμεμένηκεν, ἀκουσθέντων πάντων τῶν μελλόντων λεχθήσεσθαι παρὰ τῶν νῦν ἀπ’ ἀλλήλων διεστώτων, οὕσπερ ὁμοίως παρεῖναι ἐκελεύσαμεν, δυνηθῇ εἰς τὴν ὀφειλομένην θρησκείαν καὶ πίστιν ἀδελφικήν τε ὁμόνοιαν κἂν βραδέως ἀνακληθῆναι.
 ὑγιαίνοντά σε ὁ θεὸς ὁ παντοκράτωρ διαφυλάξαι ἐπὶ πολλοῖς ἔτεσιν.
” VI.
 ΑΝΤΙΓΡΑΦΟΝ ΒΑΣΙΛΙΚΗΣ ΕΠΙΣΤΟΛΗΣ ΔΙ’ΗΣ ΧΡΗΜΑΤΑ ΤΑΙΣ ΕΚΚΛΗΣΙΑΙΣ ΔΩΡΕΙΤΑΙ“ Κωνσταντῖνος Αὔγουστος Καικιγιανῷ ἐπισκόπῳ Χαρταυένης.
 ἐπειδήπερ ἤρεσεν κατὰ πάσας ἐπαρχίας, τάς τε Ἀφρικὰς καὶ τὰς Νουμιδίας καὶ τὰς Μαυριτανίας, ῥητοῖς τισι τῶν ὑπηρετῶν τῆς ἐνθέσμου καὶ ἁγιωτάτης καθολικῆς θρησκεία εἰς ἀναλώματα ἐπιχορηγηθῆναί τι, ἔδωκα γράμματα πρὸς Οὖρσον τὸν διασημότατον καθολικὸν τῆς Ἀφρικῆς καὶ ἐδήλωσα αὐτῷ ὅπως τρισχιλίους φόλλεις τῆ σῇ στερρότητι ἀπαριθμῆσαι φροντίσῃ.
 αὖ τοίνυν, ἡνίκα τὴν προδηλουμένην ποσότητα τῶν χρημάτων ὑποδεχθῆναι ποιήσεις, ἅπασι τοῖς προειρημένοις κατὰ τὸ βρέουιν τὸ πρὸς ἀὲ παρὰ company two οthers οf those ofthe second rank, 1 whomsoever thou thyself mayest decide to choose, and, moreover, taking with you three servants who shall be able to artend upon you οn the way, do thou be present atthe above- mentioned placeby that same day;
 so that bothbythy Firmness andby the unanimous wisdom of the others assembled, this quarrel also( which hitherto,by reason ofcertain disgraceful contentions, has maintaineda miserable existence), when all has been heard that will be said those who are now at variance among themselves, whom likewise we have commandedto be present, may,if οnIy tardily, give place toa due stateοf religion and faith and brotherly coneord.
 May the ighty God preserve thec in good health for many years.
” VI.
 Copy of an Imperial Letter in which grants of money are made tothe churches.
“ Constantine Augustus to Caecilian bishop of Carthage.
 Forasmuch as it has been our pleasurein all provinces, namely the African, the Numidian and the Mauretanian, that somewhatbecontributed for expensesto certrin specified ministers of the lawful and most holy Catholic religion,I have dispatcheda letterto Ursus,the most distinguished finance minister οf Africa,and have notified to him that he be careful to pay οver to thy Firmness three thousand folles.
 2 Do thou therefore, when thou shalt secure delivery of the aforesaid sumof money, give orders that this money be distributed among all the above- mentioned persons in accordance with the schedule Ὁσίου ἀποσταλὲν ταῦτα τὰ χρήματα διαδοθῆναι κέλευσον.
 εἰ δ’ ἄρα πρὸς τὸ συμπλγρωθῆναί μου τὴν εἰς τοῦτο περὶ ἅπαντας αὐτοὺς προαίρεσιν ἐνδεῖν τι καταμάθοις, παρὰ Ἡρακλείδα τοῦ ἐπετρόπου τῶν ἡμετέρων κτημάτων ἀναμφιλέκτως ὅπερ ἀναγκαῖον εἶναι καταμάθοις, αἰτῆσαι ὀφείλεις, καὶ γὰρ παρόντι αὐτῷ προσέταξα ἵν’ εἴ τι ἂν χρημάτων παρ’ αὐτοῦ ἡ σὴ στερρότης αἰτήσῃ, ἄνευ δισταγμοῦ τινος ἀπαριθμῆσαι φροντίσῃ.
 καὶ ἐπειδὴ ἐπυθόμην τινὰς μὴ καθεστώσης διανοίας τυγχάνοντας ἀνθρώπους τὸν λαὸν τῆς ἁγιωτάτης καὶ καθολικῆς ἐκκλησίας φαύλη τινὶ ὑπονοθεύσει βούλεσθαι διαστρέφειν, γίνωσκέ με Ἀνυλίνῳ ἀνθυπάτῳ ἀλλὰ μὴν καὶ Πατρικίῳ τῷ οὐικαρίῳ τῶν ἐπάρχων παροῦσι τοιαύτας ἐντολὰς δεδωκέναι ἵν’ ἐν τοῖς λοιποῖς ἅπασι καὶ τούτου μάλιστα τὴν προσήκουσαν φροντίδα ποιήσωνται καὶ μὴ ἀνάσχωνται περιορᾶν τοιοῦτο γινόμενον.
 διόπερ εἴ τινας τοιούτους ἀνθρώπους ἐν αὐτῇ τῆ μανίᾳ ἐπιμένειν κατίδοις, ἄνευ τινὸς ἀμφιβολίας τοῖς προειρημένοις δικασταῖς πρόσελθε καὶ αὐτὸ τοῦτο προσανένεγκε ὅπως αὐτοὺς ἐκεῖνοι, καθάπερ αὐτοῖς παροῦσιν ἐκέλευσα, ἐπιστρέφωσιν.
 ἡ θειότης τοῦ μεγάλου θεοῦ ἄε διαφυλάξαι ἐπὶ πολλοῖς ἔτεσιν.
 VII.
 ΑΝΤΙΓΡΑΦΟΝ ΒΑΣΙΛΙΚΗΣ ΕΠΙΣΤΟΛΗΣ ΔΙ’ΗΣ ΤΟΥΣ ΠΡΟΕΣΤΩΤΑΣ ΤΩΝ ΕΚΚΛΗΣΙΩΝ ΠΑΣΗΣ ΑΠΟΛΕΛΥΣΘΑΙ ΤΗΣ ΠΕΡΙ ΤΑ ΠΟΛΙΤΙΚΑ ΛΕΙΤΟΥΡΓΙΑΣ ΠΡΟΣΤΑΤΤΕΙ “ χαῖρε, Ἀνυλῖνε, τιμιώτατε ἡμῖν.
 ἐπειδὴ ἐκ πλειόνων πραγμάτων φαίνεται παρεξουθενηθεῖσαν sent to thee by Hosius.
 But if, after all, thou shalt find that there is aught lacking for the fulfilment of this my purpose in respectof them all, thou shouldest ask without doubting whatsoever thou findest to be necessary from Heraclides our procurator fiscal.
 For indeed when he was hereI gave him orders thatifthy Firmness shouldask any moneyfrom him, he should be careful to pay it over without any scruple.
 Αnd sinceI have learnt that certain personsof unstable mind are desirous of turning aside the laity of the most holy and Catholic Church by some vilemethod of seduction, know thatI have given such commands to Anulinus, the proconsul, and moreoverto Patricius, the Vicar of the Prefects, 1 when they were here, that they should give due attention in all other matters and especially in this, and not suffer such an occurrence to be overlooked;
 therefore if thou observest any such men continuing in this madness, do not thou hesitate to go to the above- mentioned judges and bring this matter before them, so that( as I commandedthem when they were here) they may turn these people from their error.
 May the divinity οf the great God preserve thee for many years.
” VII.
 Copy of an Imperial Letter, in which he gives orders that presidents of the chursches be released from all public offices.
‘‘ Greeting, Anulinus,our most honoured Sir.
 Since from many facts it appears that the setting at τὴν θρησκείαν, ἐν ἦ ἡ κορυφαία τῆς ἁγιωτάτης ἐπουρανίου αἰδὼς φυλάττεται, μεγάλους κινδύνους ἐνηνοχέναι τοῖς δημοσίοις πράγμασιν αὐτήν τε ταύτην ἐνθέσμως ἀναληφθεῖσαν καὶ φθλαττομένην μένην μεγίατην εὐτυχίαν τῷ Ῥωμαϊκῷ ὀνόματι καὶ σύμπασι τοῖς τῶν ἀνθρώπων πράγμασιν ἐξαίρετον εὐδαιμονίαν παρεαχηκέναι, τῶν θείων εὐεργεσιῶν παρεχουσῶν, ἔδοξεν ἐκείνους τοὺς ἄνδρας τοὺς τῆ ὀφειλομένῃ ἁγιότητι καὶ τῇ τοῦ νόμου τούτου παρεδρίᾳ τὰς ὑπηρεσίας τὰς ἐξ αὐτῶν τῇ τῆς θείας θρησκείας θεραπείᾳ παρέχοντας τῶν καμάτων τῶν ἰδίων τὰ ἔπαθλα κομίσασθαι, Ἀνυλῖνε τιμιώτατε.
 διόπερ ἐκείνους τοὺς εἴσω τῆς ἐπαρχίας τῆς ἀοῖ πεπιστευμένης ἐν καθολικῇ ἐκκλησίᾳ, ᾖ Καικιλιανὸς ἐφέστηκεν, τὴν ἐξ αὐτῶν ὑπηρεσίαν τῆ ἁγίᾳ ταύτῃ θρῃσκείᾳ παρέχοντας, οὕσπερ κληρικοὺς ἐπονομάζειν εἰώθασιν, ἀπὸ πάντων ἅπαξ ἁπλῶς τῶν λειτουργιῶν βούλομαι ἀλειτουργήτους διαφυλαχθῆναι, ὅπως μὴ διά τινος πλάνης ἢ ἐξολισθήσεως ἱεροσύλου ἀπὸ τῆς θεραπείας τῆς τῆ θειότητι ὀφειλομένης ἀφέλκωνται, ἀλλὰ μᾶλλον ἄνευ τινὸς ἐνοχλήσεως τῷ ἰδίῳ νόμῳ ἐξυπηρετῶνται, ὧνπερ μεγίστην περὶ τὸ θεῖον λατρείαν ποιουμένων πλεῖστον δάον τοῖς κοινοῖς πράγμασι συνοίσειν δοκεῖ.
 ἔρρωσο, Ἀνυλῖνε, τιμιώτατε καὶ ποθεινότατε ἡμῖν.
” VIII.
 τοιαῦτα μὲν οὖν ἡμῖν ἡ θεία καὶ οὐράνιος τῆς τοῦ σωτῆρος ἡμῶν ἐπιφανείας ἐδωρεῖτο χάρις, τοσαύτη τε ἅπασιν ἀνθρώποις ἀγαθῶν διὰ τῆς ἡμετέρας ἐπρυτανεύετο εἰρήνης.
 καὶ ὧδε μὲν τὰ καθ’ ἡμᾶς ἐν εὐφροσύναις καὶ πανηγύρεσιν naughtof divine worship, by whichthe highest reverence for the most holy and heavenly Poweris preserved, has brought great dangersupon public affairs, and that its lawfulrestorationand preservation have bestowed the greatest good fortune on the Roman name and singular prosperity on all the affairs of mankind( for itisthe Divine Providence which bestows these blessings):
 it has seemed good that those men who, with due holiness and constant observanceof this law, bestow their services on the performanceofdivine worship, should receive the rewards of their own labours, most honoured Anulinus.
 Wherefore it is my wish that those persons who within the province committed to thee,in the Catholic Church over which Caecilian presides, bestow their service on this holy worship— those whom they accustomed to call clerics — should onee for aIl be kept absolutely free from all the public offices, that they be not drawn away by any erroror sacrilegious fault from the worship which they owe to the Divinity, but rather without any hindrance serve to the utmost their own law.
 For when they render supreme service to the Deity, it seems that they confer incalculable benefit on the affairs of the State.
 Fare thee well, Anulinus,our most honoured and esteemed Sir.’
 VIII.
 Such then were the gifts that the divine and heavenly grace of our Saviour bestowed upon us by Ηis appearing, and such was the abundance of good things that the peace which came to us procured for all mankind.
 Αnd thus Our happy state was celebrated with rejoicings and festive assemblies.
 Nevertheless ἐτελεῖτο·
 οὐκ ἢν δὲ ἄρα τῷ μισοκάλῳ φθόνῳ τῷ τε φιλοπονήρῳ δαίμονι φορητὸς ἡ τῶν ὁρωμένων θέα, ὥσπερ οὖν οὐδὲ Λικιννίῳ πρὸς αώφρονα λογισμὸν ἐτύγχανεν αὐτάρκη τὰ τοῖς πρόαθεν δεδηλωμένοις τυράννοις συμβεβηκότα·
 ὃς εὑ φερομένης τῆς ἀρχῆς αὐτῷ βασιλέως τε μεγάλου Κωνσταντίνου δευτερείων τιμῆς ἐπιγαμβρίας τε καὶ συγγενείας τῆς ἀνωτάτω ἠξιωμένος, μιμήσεως μὲν τῆς τῶν καλῶν ἀπελιμπάνετο, τῆς δὲ τῶν ἀσεβῶν τυράννων μοχθηρίας ἐξήλου τὴν κακοτροπίαν, καὶ ὧν τοῦ βίου τὴν καταστροφὴν ἐπεῖδεν αὐτοῖς ὀφθαλμοῖς, τούτων ἕπεαθαι τῆ γνώμη μᾶλλον ἢ τῇ τοῦ κρείττονος ἐμμένειν φιλίᾳ τε καὶ διαθέσει ἠρεῖτο.
 διαφθονηθείς γέ τοι τῷ πανευεργέτῃ, πόλεμον δυσαγῆ καὶ δεινότατον πρὸς αὐτὸν ἐκφέρει, οὐ φύαεως νόμων φεισάμενος, οὐχ ὁρκωμοσιῶν οὐχ αἵματος οὐ συνθηκῶν μνήμην ἐν διανοίᾳ λαβών.
 ὁ μὲν γὰρ αὐτῷ οἷα πανάγαθος βασιλεὺς εὐνοίας παρέχων ἀληθοῦς σύμβολα, συγγενείας τῆς πρὸς αὐτὸν οὐκ ἐφθόνησεν γάμων τε λαμπρῶν ἀδελφῆς μετουσίαν οὐκ ἀπηρνήσατο, ἀλλὰ καὶ τῆς ἐκ πατέρων εὐγενείας βασιλικοῦ τε ἀνέκαθεν αἵματος κοινωνὸν γενέσθαι ἠξίωσεν τῆς τε κατὰ πάντων ἀπολαύειν ἀρχῆς οἷα κηδεστῇ καὶ συμβασιλεῖ παρεῖχεν τὴν ἐξουαίαν, οὐκ ἔλαττον μέρος τῶν ὑπὸ Ῥωμαίους ἐθνῶν διέπειν αὐτῷ καὶ διοικεῖν κεχαρισμένος.
 ὁ δ’ ἔμπαλιν τούτοις τἀναντία διεπράττετο, παντοίας ὁσημέραι κατὰ theless the envy that hates the good, even the demon who loves the evil, could not endure the sight οf hat he beheld;
 as indeed that whichhad happened the above- mentioned tyrants1 was notvenfor Licinius, to bring him to sound reason.
e who had been deemed worthy οf the princite in a state οf prosperity, of second rank aftere great Emperor Constantine, of a connexion by marriage and the most exalted kinship with him, ed from the following of good men and zealaffected the evil manners and wickedness the impious tyrants;
 and he preferred to followe judgement of those whose end he had seen with his very eyes, rather than continue on terms friendship and love with his superior.
 Filled, fact, with envy of the common benefactor, he aged an impious and most terriblewar against him, either giving respect to the laws of nature nor bewinga thought on sworn treaties or ties of blood or eements.
 For Constantine, all- gracious Emperort he was furnished him with the tokensof genuine will, did not grudge him kinship with himself, and did not refuse him the enjoyment of an illustrious union in the person of his sister.
 Nay further, he eemedhim worthy to partake of his ancertral obility and his imperial blood and origin, and bestowedon him,as a brother- in-law and the righttoa share in the supreme government 2:
 for οf his bounty he gave him the ruling and administration οf no inferior part of the peoples under the Ṛoṃan ay.
 But Licinius pursued an exactly opposite line of conduct:
 he was daily contriving all kinds of τοῦ κρείττονος μηχανὰς ἐπιτεχνώμενος πάντας τε ἐπινοῶν ἐπιβουλῆς τρόπους, ὡς ἄν κακοῖς τὸν εὐεργέτην ἀμείψοιτο.
 τὰ μὲν οὖν πρῶτα τὴν συσκευὴν ἐπικρύπτειν, φίλος εἶναι προσεποιεῖτο, δόλῳ τε καὶ ἀπάτη πλειστάκις ἐπιθέμενος ῥᾷστα ἂν τυχεῖν τοῦ προσδοκωμένου ἤλπισεν·
 τῷ δὲ ἄρα ὁ θεὸς ἢν φίλος κηδεμών τε καὶ φύλαξ, ὃς αὐτῷ τὰς ἐν ἀπορρήτῳ καὶ σκότει μηχανωμένας ἐπιβουλὰς εἰς φῶς ἄγων διήλεγχεν.
 τοσοῦτον ἀρετῆς τὸ μέγα τῆς θεοαεβείας ὅπλον πρὸς ἄμυναν μὲν ἐχθρῶν, οἰκείας δὲ φυλακὴν αωτηρίας ἰσχύει·
 ᾧ δὴ πεφραγμένος μένος ὁ θεοφιλέστατος ἡμῶν βασιλεὺς τὰς τοῦ δυσωνύμου πολυπλόκους ἐπιβουλὰς διεδίδρασκεν.
 ὃ δὲ τὴν λαθραίαν συσκευὴν ὡς οὐδαμῶς ἑώρα κατὰ γνώμην αὐτῷ χωροῦσαν, τοῦ θεοῦ πάντα δόλον τε καὶ ῥᾳδιουργίαν τῷ θεοφιλεῖ βασιλεῖ κατάφωρα ποιοῦντος, οὐκέθ’ οἷός τε ὢν ἐπικρύπτεσθαι, προφανῆ πόλεμον αἴρεται.
 ὁμόσε δῆτα Κωνσταωτίνῳ πολεμεῖν διαγνούς, ἤδη καὶ κατὰ τοῦ θεοῦ τῶν ὅλων, ὃν ἠπίστατο σέβειν αὐτόν, παρατάττεσθαι ὡρμᾶτο, κἄπειτα τοὺς ὑπ’ αὐτῷ θεοσεβεῖς, μηδὲν μηδ’ ὅλως πώποτε τὴν ἀρχὴν αὐτοῦ λυπηρὸν διαθεμένους,ἠ’ τέως τέως καὶ ἡσυχῆ πολιορκεῖν ἐπεβάλλετο.
 καὶ τοῦτ’ ἔπραττεν, δεινῶς ἀβλεπτεῖν ὑπὸ τῆς ἐμφύτου κακίας ἠναγκασμένος.
 οὔτ’ οὖν τὴν μνήμην τῶν πρὸ αὐτοῦ Χριστιανοὺς ἐκδιωξάντων πρὸ ὀφθαλμῶν ἔθετο οὐδ’ ὧν αὐτὸς ὀλετὴρ καὶ τιμωρὸς δι’ ἃς μετῆλθον ἀσεβείας κατέστη·
 ἀλλὰ γὰρ τοῦ σώφρονος ἐκτραπεὶς λογισμοῦ, διαρρήδην δὲ μανεὶς τὰς φρένας, τὸν θεὸν αὐτὸν οἷα δὴ Κωνσταντίνου βοηθὸν ἀντὶ τοῦ βοηθουμένου πολεμεῖν ἐγνώκει.
 devices against his superior, and inventing all manner of plans to reward his benefactor with evil.
 Αt first, indeed,he attempted to conceal the intrigue, and feigned friendliness, hoping that frequent recourseto guile and deceit would most easily secure his expectationS.
 But God proved to be Constantine's Friend and Protector and Guardian, who brought to light the plots that were devised secretly and in darkness, and confounded them.
 such power is there in the great weapon of godliness to ward off the enemy and to preserve itsownin safety.
 Fenced verily with this, our Emperor, most dear to God, escapedthe plots ofthis ill- famed master of intrigue.
 Αnd he, when he saw that his covert design as by no means going according to his wish( for God disclosed every guile and wickeness to the Emperor whomΗe loved), since he was no longer ableto conceal himself, raised an οpen warfare.
 Αnd, to be sure, in his decision to make war at close quartebupon Constantine,he was already hastening to battle also against the God of the universe, whom, as he knew, Constantine worshipped;
 and so he designed an attack, quietly and silently at first uponhis godly subjects, who had never at any time done any harm at all to his rule.
 Αnd this he did, because his innate wickeness had perforee brought upon him terrible blindness.
 Thus he neither kept before his eyes the memory of those who had persecuted Christians before him, nor of those whom he himself destroyed and punished for the evil deeds they had pursued.
 But he turned aside from the path of sound reason, and becoming altogether mad, decided to make war on God Himself, as the Protector of Constantine, instead ofon him who was being protected.
 Καὶ πρῶτα μὲν τῆς οἰκίας τῆς αὐτοῦ πάντα Χριστιανὸν ἀπελαύνει, ἔρημον αὐτὸς αὑτὸν ὁ δείλαιος τῆς τούτων καθιστὰς ὑπὲρ αὐτοῦ πρὸς τὸν θεὸν εὐχῆς, ἢν ὑπὲρ ἁπάντων αὐτοῖς ποιεῖσθαι πάτριον μάθημα τυγχάνει·
 εἶτα δὲ τοὺς κατὰ πόλιν ατρατιώτας ἐκκρίνεσθαι καὶ ἀποβάλλεσθαι τοῦ τῆς τιμῆς ἀξιώματος, εἰ μὴ τοῖς δαίμοσιν θύειν αἱροῖντο, παρακελεύεται.
 Καὶ ἔτι γε ταῦτα ἦν μικρά, τῆ τῶν μειζόνων συγκρινόμενα παραθέσει.
 τί δεῖ τῶν κα ἕκαστα καὶ κατὰ μέρος τῷ θεομισεῖ πεπραγμένων μνημονεύειν μονεύειν ὅπως τε νόμους ἀνόμους ὁ παρανόμω παρανομώτατος ἐξεῦρεν;
 τούς γέ τοι ἐν ταῖς εἱρκταῖς ταλαιπώρου μέν οὐ’ ς ἐνομοθέτει μηδένα μεταδόσει τροφῆς φιλανθρωπεύεσθαι μηδ’ ἐλεεῖν τοὺς ἐν δεσμοῖς λιμῷ διαφθειρομένους μηδ’ ἁπλῶς ἀγαθὸν εἶναι μηδένα μηδ’ ἀγαθόν τι πράττειν τοὺς καὶ πρὸς αὐτῆς τῆς ξύσεως ἐπὶ τὸ συμπαθὲς τῶν πέλας ἑλκομένους.
 μένους.
 καὶ ἢν γε νόμων οὗτος ἄντικρυς ἀναιδὴς καὶ ἀπηνέστατος, πᾶσαν ἥμερον ὑπερεξάγων φύσιν, ἐφ’ ᾧ καὶ τιμωρία προσέκειτο τοὺς ἐλεοῦντας τὰ ἴσα πάσχειν τοῖς ἐλεουμένοις δεσμοῖς τε καὶ φυλακαῖς καθείρηγνυσθαι, τὴν ἴσην τοῖς καταπονουμένοις ὑπομένοντας τιμωρίαν, τοὺς τὰ φιλάνθρωπαδ’ διακονουμένους.
 μένους.
 τοιαῦται αἱ Λικιννίου διατάξεις.
 τί χρὴ τὰς περὶ γάμων καινοτομίας ἀπαριθμεῖαθαι ἢ τοὺς ἐπὶ τοῖς τὸν βίον μεταλλάττουσιν νεωτερισμοὺς αὐτοῦ, δι’ ὧν τοὺς παλαιοὺς Ῥωμαίων εὖ καὶ σοφῶς κειμένους νόμους περιγραφαὶ τολμήσας, βαρβάρους τινὰς καὶ ἀνμηέρους First, he drove away every Christian from his palace;
 thus by his own aet depriving himself, wretched man, of the prayeis to God on his behalf, which after the eustom of their fathers they are taught to make for all men.
 Then he gave orders that the soldiers in cities were to be singled out and deprived of honourable rank, unless they chose to sacrifceto demons.
 And, moreover,these were but small matters when judged by comparison with graver measures.
 What need is there to mention singly and successively the things done by this hater of God:
 how, to wit, this most lawless οf men invented lawless laws? In fact, with regard to those who were suffering under imprisonment, he laid downa law that no one should treat them humanelybydistributing food, or have pity on those who were perishing of hunger in bonds;
 and that no one should be kindly at all, or doany kindly action, even When they were moved by mere natural feeling to sympathize with their neighbours.
 Αnd of his laws this one at least was quite openly shameless and theharshertοf all, in its putting aside of every civilized, natural feeling, by which also it was enacted as a punishment that those who showed pity should suffer the same as those whom they pitied, and that those who humanely ministered should endure the same punishment as those who were undergoing it, and be consigned to bonds and imprisonment.
 such were the ordinances of Lincinius.
 Why should one recount his innovations with regardto marriage, οr his revolutionary changes in respect of those who were departing this life, wherein he dared to annul the aneient laws of the Romans well and wisely laid down, and in their stead brought in certain that were ἡμέρους ἀντεισῆγεν, νόμους ἀνόμους ὡς ἀληθῶς καὶ παρανόμους, ἐπισκήψεις τε μυρίας κατὰ τῶν ὑποχειρίων ἐθνῶν ἐπενόει χρυσοῦ τε καὶ ἀργύρου παντοίας εἰσπράξεις ἀναμετρήσεις τε γῆς καὶ τῶν κατ’ ἀγροὺς μηκέτ’ ὄντων ἀνθρώπων πρόπαλαι δὲ κατοιχομένων ἐπιζήμιον κέρδος, οἵουςδ’ ἐφεῦρεν ἐπὶ τούτοις ὁ μιδάνθρωπος κατὰ μηδὲν ἠδικηκότων ἐξοριαμούς, οἵας εὐπατριδῶν καὶ ἀξιολόγων ἀνδρῶν ἀπαγωγάς, ὧν δὴ τὰς κουριδίας ἀποζευγνὺς γαμετὰς μιαροῖς τισιν οἰκέταις ἐφ’ ὕβρει πράξεως αἰσχρᾶς παρεδίδου, ὅσαις δὲ αὐτὸς ὁ ἐαχατόγηρως γυναιξὶν ὑπάνδροις παρθένοις τε κόραις ἐμπαροινῶν τὴν ἀκόλαστον τῆς αὐτοῦ ψυχῆς ἐπιθυμίαν ἐπλήρου— τί χρὴ ταῦτα μηκύνειν, τῆς τῶν ἐσχάτων αὐτοῦ πράξεων ὑπερβολῆς μικρὰ τὰ πρῶτα καὶ τὸ μηθὲν εἶναι διελεγχούσης;
 Τὸ γοῦν τέλος αὐτῷ τῆς μανίας ἐπὶ τοὺς ἐπισκόπους ἐχώρει, ἤδη τε τούτους, ὡς ἂν τοῦ ἐπὶ πάντων θεοῦ θεράποντας, ἐναντίους ὑπάρχειν οἷς ἔδρα ἡγούμενος, οὔπω μὲν ἐκ τοῦ φανεροῦ διὰ τὸν ἀπὸ τοῦ κρείττονος φόβον, λάθρα δὲ αὖθις καὶ δολίως συνεσκευάζετο, ἀνῄρει τε τούτων δι’ ἐπιβουλῆς τῶν ἡγεμόνων τοὺς δοκιμωτάτους.
 καὶ ὁ τρόπος’ δε τοῦ κατ’ αὐτῶν φόνου ξένος τις ἢν καὶ οἷος οὐδεπώποτε ἠκούσθη.
 τὰ γοῦν ἀμφὶ τὴν Αμάσειαν καὶ τὰς λοιπὰς τοῦ Πόντου πόλεις κατεργασθέντα πᾶσαν ὑπερβολὴν ὠμότητος ὑπερηκόντισεν·
 ἔνθα τῶν ἐκκλησιῶν τοῦ θεοῦ αἰ μὲν ἐξ ὕφους εἰς ἔδαφος αὗθις κατερρίπτοντο, τὰς δὲ ἀπέκλειον, ὡς ἂν μὴ συνάγοιτό τις τῶν εἰωθότων μηδὲ τῷ θεῷ τὰς ἐποφειλομένας ἀποδιδῷ λατρείας.
 συντελεῖσθαι γὰρ οὐχ ἡγεῖτο ὑπὲρ αὐτοῦ τὰς barbarous and uncivilized, that truly were lawless and contrary to law;
 or the countlessassessments that he derised to the detrimentofhis subject peoples, and the manifold exactions of gold and silver, the revaluationsof land, and the lucrative fines of men in the country parts no longer alive but long since departed? Αnd, moreover, as to the banishments that this hater οf mankind inflicted upon those who had done no wrong, the arrests of noble and highlyesteemed men, whose wedded wives he separated from them and consigned to certain abominable members οf his household for disgraceful insult;
 as to the manymarriedwomen and unwedded giris with whom this drunken old dotard satished his soul's unbridled lust—why should one enlargeon these things, when the outrageous character οf his last deeds show the first to be small and of no account? For example, in the final stage of his madness he proceeded against the bishops, and deeming them opposed to his doings, as being the servants of the supreme God, forthwith plotted against them, not openly as yet( for he fearedhis superior), but once more with secrecy and guile;
 and the most hlghly respected οf these, by the contrivance of the governors, he put to death.
 Αnd the manner in which they were murdered was strange and hitherto unheard of.
 For instance, the things that were done at Amasea and the other cities of Pontus outdid every exeess of cruelty.
 There some of the churches of God were again thrown down from the top to the bottom;
 others they shut up, so that none of the accustomed worshippers might assemble or pay to God the service due to Ηim.
 For he did not think that the prayers were offered on his behalf— such suchwas the εὐχάς, συνειδότι φαύλῳ τοῦτο λογιζόμενος, ἀλλ’ ὑπὲρ τοῦ θεοφιλοῦς βασιλέως πάντα πράττειν ἡμᾶς καὶ τὸν θεὸν ἱλεοῦσθαι πέπειστο·
 ἔνθεν ὡρμᾶτο καθ’ ἡμῶν τὸν θυμὸν ἐπισκήπτειν.
 καὶ δῆτα τῶν ἡγεμόνων οἱ κόλακες, τὰ φίλα πράττειν τῷ δυσαγεῖ πεπεισμένοι, τῶν ἐπισκόπων τοὺς μὲν συνήθως ταῖς τῶν κακούργων ἀνδρῶν περιέβαλλον τιμῶ τιμωρίαις, ἀπήγοντό τε καὶ ἐκολάζοντο ἀπροφασίστως τοῖς μιαιφόνοις ὁμοίως οἱ μηδὲν ἠδικηκότες·
 ἤδη δέ τινες καινοτέραν ὑπέμενον τελευτήν, ξίφει τὸ σῶμα εἰς πολλὰ τμήματα κατακρεουργούμενοι καὶ μετὰ τὴν ἀπηνῆ ταύτην καὶ φρικτοτάτην θέαν τοῖς τῆς θαλάσσης βυθοῖς ἰχθύσιν εἰς βορὰν ῥιπτούμενοι.
 φυγαὶ δὴ αὖθις ἐπὶ τούτοις τῶν θεοσεβῶν ἐγίνοντο ἀνδρῶν, καὶ πάλιν ἀγροὶ καὶ πάλιν ἐρημίαι νάπαι τε καὶ ὄρη τοὺς χριστοῦ θεράποντας ὑπεδέχοντο.
 ἐπεὶ δὲ καὶ ταῦτα τοῦτον προυχώρει τῷ δυσσεβεῖ τὸν τρόπον, λοιπὸν καὶ τὸν κατὰ πάντων ἀνακινεῖν διωγμὸν ἐπὶ διάνοιαν ἐβάλλετο, ἐκράτει τε γνώμης καὶ οὐδὲν ἐμποδὼν ἦν αὐτῷ μὴ οὐχὶ ἐν ἔργῳ χωρεῖν, εἰ μὴ τάχιστα τὸ μέλλον ἔσεσθαι προλαβὼν ὁ τῶν οἰκείων ψυχῶν ὑπέρμαχος θεὸς ὡς ἐν βαθεῖ σκότῳ καὶ νυκτὶ φωστῆρα μέγαν ἀθρόως καὶ σωτῆρα τοῖς πᾶσιν ἐξέλαμψεν, τὸν αὐτοῦ θεράποντα Κωνσταντῖνον ὑψηλῷ βραχίονι ἐπὶ τὰ τῇδε χειραγωγήσας.
 lX.
 τούτῳ μὲν οὖν ἄνωθεν ἐξ οὐρανοῦ καρπὸν εὐσεβείας ἐπάξιον τὰ τρόπαια τῆς κατὰ τῶν ἀσεβῶν παρεῖχε νίκης, τὸν δ’ ἀλιτήριον αὐτοῖς συμβούλοις ἅπασιν καὶ φίλοις ὑπὸ τοῖς Κωνσταωτίνου ποσὶν πρηνῆ κατέβαλεν.
 Ὡς γὰρ εἰς ἔσχατα μανίας τὰ κατ’ αὐτὸν reckoning of an evil conscience— but had been that wedid everything and supplicated God on behalf of the Emperor whom Ηe loved.
 Hence he hastened to vent his wrathon us.
 Αnd in truth the sycophants among the governors, persuaded that they were doing what pleased the impious man, plied someοf the bishopswith penalties suitablefor malefactors,and those who had done no wrong were led away and punished, withouta pretext, like murderers.
 Αnd some endured at that time a more novel form of death:
 their bodies were cut witha sword into many pieces, and after this cruel and most fearful sight they were cast into the depths of the sea as food for fishes.
 Thereupon the men of God beganagainto flee, and οnce more the fields, οnce morethe deserts, glens and mountains received the servants of Christ.
 Αnd when the impious man was thus suceessful in these measures also, he then conceived the ideaof stirring up anew the persecution against all.
 Ηe had power to accomplish his purpose, and there was nothingto hinder him carryingit into effect,had not God, the Championof the souls thatare His own, foreseeing with all speed what wouldcometo pass, caused to shine forth all at once, as itwere οut of deepdarkness and most murky night,a great luminary and sariour of them all, leading thither witha lofty arm his servant Constantine.
 IX.
 To him, then,as the worthy fruit οf piety did God vouchsafe from heaven above the trophies of victory over the wieked men;
 as for theguilty one, Ηe laidhim low,with all hiscounscellors and friends, prone beneath the feet οf Constantine.
 For when Licinius had carried his madnessto the ἤλαυνεν, οὐκέτ’ ἀνεκτὸν εἶναι λογισάμενος βασιλεὺς ὁ τῷ θεῷ φίλος τὸν σώφρονα συναγαγὼν λογισμὸν καὶ τὸν στερρὸν τοῦ δικαίου τρόπον φιλανθρωπίᾳ κερασάμενος, ἐπαμῦναι κρίνει τοῖς ὑπὸ τῷ τυράννῳ ταλαιπωρουμένοις, καὶ τό γε πλεῖστον ἀνθρώπων γένος, βραχεῖς λυμεῶνας ἐκποδὼν ποιησάμενος, ἀνασώσασθαι ὁρμᾶται.
 μόνη γὰρ αὐτῷ χρωμένῳ φιλανθρωπίᾳ τὸν πρὸ τούτου χρόνον καὶ τὸν οὐ συμπαθείας ἄξιον ἐλεοῦντι, τῷ μὲν οὐδὲν ἐγίνετο πλέον, τῆς κακίας οὐκ ἀπαλλαττομένῳ, αὔξοντι δὲ μᾶλλον τὴν κατὰ τῶν ὑποχειρίων ἐθνῶν λύτταν, τοῖς δὲ κακουμένοις οὔτις ἐλείπετο σωτηρίας ἐλπίς, ὑπὸ δεινῷ θηρὶ κατατυραννουμένοις.
 δι’ ὃ δὴ τῷ φιλαγάθῳ μίξας τὸ μισοπόνηρον ὁ τῶν ἀγαθῶν ἀρωγὸς πρόεισιν ἅμα παιδὶ Κρίστῳ βασιλεῖ φιλανθρωποτάτῳ σωτήριον δεξιὰν ἅπασιν τοῖς ἀπολλυμένοις ἐκτείνας·
 εἶθ’ οἷα παρβασιλεῖ θεῷ θεοῦ τε παιδὶ σωτῆρι ἁπάντων ποδηγῷ καὶ συμμάχῳ χρώμενοι, πατὴρ ἅμα καὶ υἱὸς ἄμφω κύκλῳ διελόντες τὴν κατὰ τῶν θεομισῶν παράταξιν, ῥᾳδίαν τὴν νίκην ἀποφέρονται, τῶν κατὰ τὴν συμβολὴν πάντων ἐξευμαρισθέντων αὐτοῖς ὑπὸ τοῦ θεοῦ κατὰ γνώμην.
 ἀθρόως δῆτα καὶ λόγου θᾶττον οἱ μὲν χθὲς καὶ πρὸ ἡμέρας θανάτου πνέοντες καὶ ἀπειλῆς οὐκέτ’ ἦσαν, οὐδὲ μέχρις ὀνόματος μνημονευόμενοι, γραφαί τε αὐτῶν καὶ τιμαὶ τὴν ἀξίαν αἰσχύνην ἀπελάμβανον, καὶ ἃ τοῖς πάλαι δυσσεβέσιν τυράννοις ἐνεῖδεν αὐτοῖς ὀφθαλμοῖς Λικίννιος, ταῦτα ὁμοίως καὶ αὐτὸς ἔπασχεν, urtennost,the Εmperor,the friend οf God, reckoning that he wasnolonger to be endured, summoned his sound powersof reason, and tempering the stern qualities of justice with humanity determined to succour those Who were being evil intreated underthe tyrant's power;
 and hastened, by puttingafew spoilers outofthe way, to reseue the greater part of the human race.
 For hitherto, when he employed humanity alone and showed mercy to him who was undeserving of sympathy, there was no improvement in Licinius:
 he did not giveoverhis wickedness, but rather increased his mad fury against his subject peoples;
 while as for those who were ill- treated, no hopeof salvation was left for them, ground downas they were bya terrible wild beast.
 Wherefore, mingling a hatred of evil withalove of goodness, the defender of the goodwent forth, with that most humane Εmperor, his son Crispus, stretching out the right handof salvation to all who were perishing.
 Then, inasmuch as they had God the universal King and son of God, the Saviourof all, as their Ouide and Αlly, the father and son both together divided their battle- array against the haters of God on all sides and easily Won the victory;
 1 for everything in the encounter was made smooth for them by God according to His purpose.
 Tea verily, all at onceandin less time than it takesto say it, those Who the other day were breathing death and threatening wereno more, nor was even so much as their name remembered;
 their pictures and honours receiveda welldeserved disgrace;
 and the things that Licinius had seen with his own eyes happen to the impious tyrants ὅτι μηδ’ αὐτὸς ἐδέξατο παιδείαν μηδὲ ἐπὶ ταῖς τῶν πέλας ἐσωφρονίσθη μάστιξιν, τὴν ὁμοίανδ’ ἐκείνοις τῆς ἀσεβείας μετελθὼν ὁδόν, ἐπὶ τὸν ἴσον αὐτοῖς ἐνδίκως περιηνέχθη κρημνόν.
 Αλλ ' οὗτος μὲν ταύτῃ πη βεβλημένος ἔκειτο·
 ὁ δ’ ἀρετῇ πάσῃ θεοσεβείας ἐκπρέπων μέγιστος νικητὴς Κωνσταντῖνος σὺν παιδὶ Κρίσπῳ, βασιλεῖ θεοφιλεστάτῳ καὶ τὰ πάντα τοῦ πατρὸς ὁμοίῳ, τὴν οἰκείαν ἑῴαν ἀπελάμβανον καὶ μίαν ἡνωμένην τὴν Ῥωμαίων κατὰ τὸ παλαιὸν παρεῖχον ἀρχήν, τὴν ἀπ’ ἀνίσχοντος ἡλίου πᾶσαν ἐν κύκλῳ κατὰ θάτερα τῆς οἰκουμένης ἄρκτον τε ὁμοῦ καὶ μεσημβρίαν εἰς ἔσχατα δυομένης ἡμέρας ὑπὸ τὴν αὐτῶν ἄγοντες εἰρήνην.
 ἀφῄρητο δ’ οὖν ἐξ ἀνθρώπων πᾶν δέος τῶν πρὶν αὐτοὺς πιεζούντων, λαμπρὰςδ’ ἐτέλουν καὶ πανηγυρικὰς ἑορτῶν ἡμέρας, ἢν τε φωτὸς ἔμπλεα πάντα, καὶ μειδιῶσι προσώποις ὄμμασί τε φαιδροῖς οἱ πρὶν κατηφεῖς ἀλλήλους ἔβλεπον, χορεῖαιδ’ αὐτοῖς καὶ ὕμνοι κατὰ πόλεις ὁμοῦ καὶ ἀγροὺς τὸν παμβασιλέα θεὸν πρώτιστα πάντων, ὅτι δὴ τοῦτ’ ἐδιδάχθησαν, κἄπειτα τὸν εὐσεβῆ βασιλέα παισὶν ἅμα θεοφιλέσιν ἐγέραιρον, κακῶν δ’ ἀμνηστία παλαιῶν ἦν καὶ λήθη πάσης δυσσεβείας, παρόντωνδ’ ἀγαθῶν ἀπόλαυσις καὶ προσέτι μελλόντων προσδοκίαι.
 ἥπλωντο δ’ οὗν κατὰ πάντα τόπον τοῦ νικητοῦ βασιλέως φιλανθρωπίας ἔμπλεοι διατάξεις νόμοι τε μεγαλοδωρεᾶς καὶ ἀληθοῦς εὐσεβείας γνωρίσματα περιέχοντες.
 οὕτω δῆτα πάσης τυραννίδος ἐκκαθαρθείσης, μόνοις ἐφυλάττετο τὰ τῆς προσηκούσης βασιλείας βέβαιά τε καὶ ἀνεπίφθονα Κωνσταντίνῳ καὶ τοῖς ofdays gone by,these he himself also likewise suffered;
 for neither did he receive correction nor did he learn wisdom from the strokes that fell upon his neighbours, but pursued the same path of iniquityas they did, and justly reeled over the same precipice.
 Thus was licinius cast down prostrate.
 But Constantine the most mighty Victor, resplendent with every virtue that godliness bestows, together with his son Crispus, an Emperor most dear to God and in all respects like unto his father, recovered the Εast that belonged to them, and formedthe Roman Εmpire, as inthe days of old, intoasingle united whole, bringing under their peaceful rule all of it, from the rising sun round about in the two directions, north as well as south, even to the uttermost limits of the declining day.
 So then, there was taken away from men all fear of those who formerly oppressed them;
 they celebrated brilliant festivals;
 all things were filled with light, and men, formerly downcast, looked at each otherwith smiling countenanees and beaming eyes;
 with daneing and hymns in city and country alike they gave honour first of all to God the universal King, for this they had been instrueted to do, and, then to the pious Emperor with his sons beloved of God;
 old ills were forgotten and oblivion cast on every deed of impiety;
 present good things were enjoyed, with the further hope of those which were yet for to come.
 Αnd, in short, there ẁ̀ere promulgated in every plaee ordinances of the victorious Emperor full of love for humanity, and las that betokened munificenceand true piety.
 Thus verily, when all tyranny had been purged away, the kingdom that belonged to them was preserved stedfast and undisputed for Constantine and his sons alone;
 αὐτοῦ αὐτοῦ οἳ τῶν πρόσθεν ἁπάντων ἀποσμήξαντες τοῦ βίου τὴν θεοστυγίαν, τῶν ἐκ θεοῦ πρυτανευθέντων ἀγαθῶν αὐτοῖς ᾐσθημένως τὸ φιλάρετον καὶ θεοφιλὲς τό τε πρὸς τὸ θεῖον εὐσεβὲς καὶ εὐχάριστον δι’ ὣν εἰς προῦπτον ἅπασιν ἀνθρώποις παρέσχον ὁρᾶν, ἐπεδείξαντο whο, when they had made it their very Brst action to cleanse the world frοm hatred of Gοd, cοnsciοus οf the good things that Ηe had bestowed upon them, displayed their love of virtue and of God, their piety and gratitude towards the Deity, by their manifest deeds in the sight of all men.
